The year was 1982 and the place was Camp Torah
Vodaath, a boys’ summer camp in upstate New
York. The time was shortly after sunrise. A bunk
of 13-year-olds was preparing for a hike — a very long one.
A day earlier, their counselor had surprised them with an idea.
“Around 25 miles from here is Camp Staten Island, the summer home
of Yeshivah of Staten Island, whose Rosh Yeshivah is Reb Moshe. You
may know that Reb Moshe has been ill and rarely leaves his home. He
is spending the summer at the camp. If we hike there, we can actually
meet him and even ask him for a berachah!”
The campers, every one of them, were excited at the idea.
“Reb Moshe” was Rabbi Moshe Feinstein, Rosh Yeshivah of
Mesivtha Tifereth Jerusalem and Yeshivah of Staten Island, and the
acknowledged gadol hador, leader of the generation, and posek
hador, greatest expert on Halachah in his generation.
How does one become the gadol hador? Certainly not by running for office! Gedolim do not run for office. Quite the opposite;
they run away from any sort of honor or recognition. That is because
gedolim are very humble people. They seek to serve Hashem faithfully and help their fellow Jew quietly, without publicity or fanfare.
A gadol hador is a talmid chacham whose knowledge of Torah
is breathtaking, who seems to know every bit of Torah one can possibly know. He is an exceptional baal middos, whose every action is
a lesson in how a Jew should act. He is wise and caring and advises
people on all sorts of problems and questions that they have.
The Jewish people have a “sixth sense” for knowing who their
gedolim are. Almost from the time Reb Moshe arrived in America in
1936, he was recognized as a great Torah leader. With the passage of
time, he became known as the greatest of his generation.
It’s no wonder that those campers were eager to meet Reb
Moshe, even if it meant hiking 25 miles! For most of them it would
be the first time in their lives that they would be meeting him.
When they started out on their hike, the sun had just risen and
the air was still cool. The more they walked, the hotter it got and the
The Plans
Change
more weary they became. By mid-afternoon, they had
hiked around 12 miles. Some of the boys felt that they
could not walk much further.
The counselor called his camp director, who felt bad for the boys.
He said that he would send taxis to take the boys the rest of the
way to Camp Staten Island
and then drive them
back to Camp Torah
Vodaath. The boys,
and their counselor, were grateful
and excited.
But when they arrived at
Camp Staten Island, their excitement gave way to disappointment.
They were told that Reb Moshe
was feeling particularly unwell that
day and no one was being allowed
in to see him. Reb Moshe’s grandson, who was assisting his grandfather that day, had an idea. He
would ask his grandfather to sit at
a table on the enclosed porch of
his bungalow. That way, at least the
boys could see Reb Moshe from a
distance.
The boys made their way to the
bungalow, disappointed but grateful that at least they would be getting a glimpse of Reb Moshe.
When Reb Moshe’s grandson informed him of what these boys
had done, he exclaimed, “Such mesiras nefesh!” Reb Moshe was
Surprise amazed that these boys had attempted to walk twentyfive miles just to see him! And he felt bad to disappoint them.
As they were talking, Rebbetzin Sima (pronounced “Shima”)
Feinstein, Reb Moshe’s devoted wife, entered the room. When she
heard about the boys’ trek, she suggested that they come to the
bungalow’s back door (where they would not be noticed by others
who might be tempted to join them) and greet Reb Moshe individually. Reb Moshe loved the idea.
For the campers and their counselor, it was a dream come true.
Reb Moshe shook each boy’s hand, asked him his name, and blessed
him. Then he asked his grandson to get food for the boys and also
asked that arrangements be made for them to go swimming in the
camp’s pool before leaving. And he told the campers that they should
never again attempt such a long and difficult hike.
More than 30 years have passed since then. For those campers,
who today are grown men, one of their most special memories is
the day they were privileged to meet one of the greatest and most
humble men of recent times, whose generation referred to him with
love, admiration, and respect as “Reb Moshe.”
This book tells the story of his incredible life.

Jewish first names are very meaningful. It is said
that when parents choose a Hebrew name for their
child, Hashem grants them special wisdom so that
they select a name that fits that child’s neshamah. A father and mother
may name their son after his grandfather, or their daughter after an
aunt, but in reality Hashem has arranged for them to choose the perfect name for that newborn’s neshamah.
On the seventh of Adar 5655
(1895), Rabbi Dovid and Rebbetzin
Faya Gittel Feinstein became the
proud parents of a baby boy.
However, they did not name
him after a grandfather or
other relative. Instead, they
named him after Moshe
Rabbeinu, whose birthday
and yahrtzeit are on that date.
It certainly appears that
a spark of ruach hakodesh
inspired this couple to give
their child this name. For, like
Moshe Rabbeinu, their son would
sit from early morning until late
into the night studying, teaching, and
answering important questions that people would come to ask. And
like Moshe Rabbeinu, their son would be so devoted to his people
that he would always be ready to help them no matter how difficult
it might be.
But no one is born a tzaddik. Little Moshe may have had the
potential to become a leader and teacher of his people, but he would
have to work hard to grow in Torah, yiras Shamayim, and good middos. It certainly helped that he had good examples to follow.
His father was a great talmid chacham and tzaddik, his mother
a great tzadekes. And when little Moshe’s parents wanted to inspire
him to trust in Hashem and serve Him with absolute devotion, a story
they told about his great-grandfather made a powerful impression.

Reb Moshe’s father was named after his own grandfather, Reb
Dovid Feinstein, a G-d-fearing man who worked as a common laborer.
The Shot
That Missed
When Reb Dovid (Reb Moshe’s great-grandfather)
was hired to work for a non-Jew, he made one condition: Every day he must be allowed time off to daven
Minchah. Reb Dovid’s employer was not very happy about this condition. He was angry that precious time that could have been used for
work would be “wasted” because the Jew had to say his prayers. But
Reb Dovid was a good worker and the man needed him, so he agreed.
The employer became even angrier when he saw that Reb Dovid’s
Shemoneh Esrei was recited carefully and with intense concentration
— and lasted a very long time. “Who does he think he is?” the man
fumed. “This is no synagogue where you can pray as long as you like.
I only intended to allow him a couple of minutes off, and nothing
more!”
Instead of speaking to Reb Dovid directly, the man decided to
send the Jew a message to show how upset he was. He wanted it to
be a message that Reb Dovid would remember for a very long time.
One day, as Reb Dovid stood with his eyes closed, praying
Shemoneh Esrei, his employer moved behind him, a shotgun in
his hands. As Reb Dovid bowed at one point, a shot rang out and
a bullet whizzed above his head. The gentile watched gleefully,
expecting to see the Jew collapse from fright or make a mad dash
for the door.
He was greatly disappointed. Reb Dovid continued to pray as if
nothing at all had occurred. It is possible that he did not even hear
the gunshot, so intense was his concentration. Later, the employer
told Reb Dovid that he had been angry enough to kill him if he had
run or even turned around when the shot was fired. But when he saw
how intensely Reb Dovid was concentrating on his prayer, he realized
that Reb Dovid was truly a G-d-fearing man. From then on, the man
would refer to Reb Dovid as “my Jew,” and never again complained
about the length of his davening.

Reb Moshe’s father, Reb Dovid, served as Rav of the small town
of Uzda and later of the city of Starobin. He was admired by everyone
for his devotion to learning and exceptional middos.
In fact, the great Ponovezh Rosh Yeshivah, Rabbi
Elazar Menachem Shach, once said that Reb Dovid’s
tzidkus was “beyond description”!
The same could have been said of Reb Moshe’s mother, of whom
Reb Moshe wrote: “There was no one like her in fear of Hashem and
love of Torah. All she wanted was that her children should become
great in Torah. She did everything possible to make sure that we
should not waste time from our learning.”
Reb Dovid earned a small salary as Rav of Uzda, not enough to
feed himself, his wife, and their many children. That is why his wife
sold yeast to the townspeople. This income, together with her husband’s salary, was just enough to live on.
Then, a non-Jew opened a store that sold baking supplies, including yeast. Many of the townspeople, especially those who were not
Jewish, began purchasing yeast from him. The Rebbetzin lost many
of her steady customers. Their income shrank and there was not
enough money even for basic foods.
Some people suggested that the gentile be asked to stop selling
yeast, but Reb Dovid rejected this idea. Instead, he placed his full
trust in Hashem, confident that somehow he and his family would
have whatever they needed.
One day, the gentile’s wagon, laden with yeast, rode down a path
that brought it past Reb Dovid’s house. As it came directly in front
of the house, the horse pulling the wagon came to a sudden halt; no
one understood why. The driver’s repeated whippings and commands
accomplished nothing; the horse simply would not budge.
The gentile knew that his yeast sales had hurt the Rabbi’s business. He was smart enough to understand that the horse’s strange
behavior was a warning from Heaven that he had done wrong. He
jumped off his wagon, knocked on Reb Dovid’s door, and begged
forgiveness for having caused anguish to him and his family — and
he promised not to sell another speck of yeast.
The gentile then returned to his wagon — and the horse started
down the road without a moment’s delay.

When he served as Rav of Starobin, Reb Dovid stopped at an inn
overnight while on a journey. The innkeeper recognized Reb Dovid,
who was famous as a rav and posek, and treated him
with great honor and respect. The innkeeper brought
his only urn into Reb Dovid’s room in case he desired
a cup of hot tea during the night.
A short while later, a chasan and kallah arrived at the inn. When
they asked the innkeeper for the use of his urn, he told them that
the urn was in the Starobiner Rav’s room, but he would ask the Rav
if they could borrow it for a short while.
When the request was put forth to Reb Dovid, he replied, “What
is the question? In fact, I think it would be best to keep the urn in
the room of the chasan and kallah the entire night; they deserve to
be treated royally.”
The chasan and kallah were
Rabbi and Mrs. Yosef Adler.
Years later, they emigrated
to America, where Rabbi
Adler became menahel of Mesivtha Tifereth
Jerusalem. Later, when
Reb Moshe came to
America and was being
considered for the position of Rosh Yeshivah at
Tifereth Jerusalem, Mrs.
Adler reminded her husband of the incident with
Reb Dovid and the urn.
“It is quite possible,” she said,
“that Reb Dovid’s son Reb Moshe
has the same wonderful middos that his
father had. If so, he will set a wonderful example for the talmidim. I
think you should appoint him as Rosh Yeshivah.” Rabbi Adler agreed
with his wife, and soon after, Reb Moshe became Rosh Yeshivah.
An act of kindness by Reb Dovid at an inn in Russia would result,
many years later, in his son being appointed as a Rosh Yeshivah in
America, and from that position, he would come to be recognized
as a gadol hador.
