The year was 1982 and the place was Camp Torah
Vodaath, a boys’ summer camp in upstate New
York. The time was shortly after sunrise. A bunk
of 13-year-olds was preparing for a hike — a very long one.
A day earlier, their counselor had surprised them with an idea.
“Around 25 miles from here is Camp Staten Island, the summer home
of Yeshivah of Staten Island, whose Rosh Yeshivah is Reb Moshe. You
may know that Reb Moshe has been ill and rarely leaves his home. He
is spending the summer at the camp. If we hike there, we can actually
meet him and even ask him for a berachah!”
The campers, every one of them, were excited at the idea.
“Reb Moshe” was Rabbi Moshe Feinstein, Rosh Yeshivah of
Mesivtha Tifereth Jerusalem and Yeshivah of Staten Island, and the
acknowledged gadol hador, leader of the generation, and posek
hador, greatest expert on Halachah in his generation.
How does one become the gadol hador? Certainly not by running for office! Gedolim do not run for office. Quite the opposite;
they run away from any sort of honor or recognition. That is because
gedolim are very humble people. They seek to serve Hashem faithfully and help their fellow Jew quietly, without publicity or fanfare.
A gadol hador is a talmid chacham whose knowledge of Torah
is breathtaking, who seems to know every bit of Torah one can possibly know. He is an exceptional baal middos, whose every action is
a lesson in how a Jew should act. He is wise and caring and advises
people on all sorts of problems and questions that they have.
The Jewish people have a “sixth sense” for knowing who their
gedolim are. Almost from the time Reb Moshe arrived in America in
1936, he was recognized as a great Torah leader. With the passage of
time, he became known as the greatest of his generation.
It’s no wonder that those campers were eager to meet Reb
Moshe, even if it meant hiking 25 miles! For most of them it would
be the first time in their lives that they would be meeting him.
When they started out on their hike, the sun had just risen and
the air was still cool. The more they walked, the hotter it got and the
The Plans
Change
more weary they became. By mid-afternoon, they had
hiked around 12 miles. Some of the boys felt that they
could not walk much further.
The counselor called his camp director, who felt bad for the boys.
He said that he would send taxis to take the boys the rest of the
way to Camp Staten Island
and then drive them
back to Camp Torah
Vodaath. The boys,
and their counselor, were grateful
and excited.
But when they arrived at
Camp Staten Island, their excitement gave way to disappointment.
They were told that Reb Moshe
was feeling particularly unwell that
day and no one was being allowed
in to see him. Reb Moshe’s grandson, who was assisting his grandfather that day, had an idea. He
would ask his grandfather to sit at
a table on the enclosed porch of
his bungalow. That way, at least the
boys could see Reb Moshe from a
distance.
The boys made their way to the
bungalow, disappointed but grateful that at least they would be getting a glimpse of Reb Moshe.
When Reb Moshe’s grandson informed him of what these boys
had done, he exclaimed, “Such mesiras nefesh!” Reb Moshe was
Surprise amazed that these boys had attempted to walk twentyfive miles just to see him! And he felt bad to disappoint them.
As they were talking, Rebbetzin Sima (pronounced “Shima”)
Feinstein, Reb Moshe’s devoted wife, entered the room. When she
heard about the boys’ trek, she suggested that they come to the
bungalow’s back door (where they would not be noticed by others
who might be tempted to join them) and greet Reb Moshe individually. Reb Moshe loved the idea.
For the campers and their counselor, it was a dream come true.
Reb Moshe shook each boy’s hand, asked him his name, and blessed
him. Then he asked his grandson to get food for the boys and also
asked that arrangements be made for them to go swimming in the
camp’s pool before leaving. And he told the campers that they should
never again attempt such a long and difficult hike.
More than 30 years have passed since then. For those campers,
who today are grown men, one of their most special memories is
the day they were privileged to meet one of the greatest and most
humble men of recent times, whose generation referred to him with
love, admiration, and respect as “Reb Moshe.”
This book tells the story of his incredible life.

Jewish first names are very meaningful. It is said
that when parents choose a Hebrew name for their
child, Hashem grants them special wisdom so that
they select a name that fits that child’s neshamah. A father and mother
may name their son after his grandfather, or their daughter after an
aunt, but in reality Hashem has arranged for them to choose the perfect name for that newborn’s neshamah.
On the seventh of Adar 5655
(1895), Rabbi Dovid and Rebbetzin
Faya Gittel Feinstein became the
proud parents of a baby boy.
However, they did not name
him after a grandfather or
other relative. Instead, they
named him after Moshe
Rabbeinu, whose birthday
and yahrtzeit are on that date.
It certainly appears that
a spark of ruach hakodesh
inspired this couple to give
their child this name. For, like
Moshe Rabbeinu, their son would
sit from early morning until late
into the night studying, teaching, and
answering important questions that people would come to ask. And
like Moshe Rabbeinu, their son would be so devoted to his people
that he would always be ready to help them no matter how difficult
it might be.
But no one is born a tzaddik. Little Moshe may have had the
potential to become a leader and teacher of his people, but he would
have to work hard to grow in Torah, yiras Shamayim, and good middos. It certainly helped that he had good examples to follow.
His father was a great talmid chacham and tzaddik, his mother
a great tzadekes. And when little Moshe’s parents wanted to inspire
him to trust in Hashem and serve Him with absolute devotion, a story
they told about his great-grandfather made a powerful impression.

Reb Moshe’s father was named after his own grandfather, Reb
Dovid Feinstein, a G-d-fearing man who worked as a common laborer.
The Shot
That Missed
When Reb Dovid (Reb Moshe’s great-grandfather)
was hired to work for a non-Jew, he made one condition: Every day he must be allowed time off to daven
Minchah. Reb Dovid’s employer was not very happy about this condition. He was angry that precious time that could have been used for
work would be “wasted” because the Jew had to say his prayers. But
Reb Dovid was a good worker and the man needed him, so he agreed.
The employer became even angrier when he saw that Reb Dovid’s
Shemoneh Esrei was recited carefully and with intense concentration
— and lasted a very long time. “Who does he think he is?” the man
fumed. “This is no synagogue where you can pray as long as you like.
I only intended to allow him a couple of minutes off, and nothing
more!”
Instead of speaking to Reb Dovid directly, the man decided to
send the Jew a message to show how upset he was. He wanted it to
be a message that Reb Dovid would remember for a very long time.
One day, as Reb Dovid stood with his eyes closed, praying
Shemoneh Esrei, his employer moved behind him, a shotgun in
his hands. As Reb Dovid bowed at one point, a shot rang out and
a bullet whizzed above his head. The gentile watched gleefully,
expecting to see the Jew collapse from fright or make a mad dash
for the door.
He was greatly disappointed. Reb Dovid continued to pray as if
nothing at all had occurred. It is possible that he did not even hear
the gunshot, so intense was his concentration. Later, the employer
told Reb Dovid that he had been angry enough to kill him if he had
run or even turned around when the shot was fired. But when he saw
how intensely Reb Dovid was concentrating on his prayer, he realized
that Reb Dovid was truly a G-d-fearing man. From then on, the man
would refer to Reb Dovid as “my Jew,” and never again complained
about the length of his davening.

Reb Moshe’s father, Reb Dovid, served as Rav of the small town
of Uzda and later of the city of Starobin. He was admired by everyone
for his devotion to learning and exceptional middos.
In fact, the great Ponovezh Rosh Yeshivah, Rabbi
Elazar Menachem Shach, once said that Reb Dovid’s
tzidkus was “beyond description”!
The same could have been said of Reb Moshe’s mother, of whom
Reb Moshe wrote: “There was no one like her in fear of Hashem and
love of Torah. All she wanted was that her children should become
great in Torah. She did everything possible to make sure that we
should not waste time from our learning.”
Reb Dovid earned a small salary as Rav of Uzda, not enough to
feed himself, his wife, and their many children. That is why his wife
sold yeast to the townspeople. This income, together with her husband’s salary, was just enough to live on.
Then, a non-Jew opened a store that sold baking supplies, including yeast. Many of the townspeople, especially those who were not
Jewish, began purchasing yeast from him. The Rebbetzin lost many
of her steady customers. Their income shrank and there was not
enough money even for basic foods.
Some people suggested that the gentile be asked to stop selling
yeast, but Reb Dovid rejected this idea. Instead, he placed his full
trust in Hashem, confident that somehow he and his family would
have whatever they needed.
One day, the gentile’s wagon, laden with yeast, rode down a path
that brought it past Reb Dovid’s house. As it came directly in front
of the house, the horse pulling the wagon came to a sudden halt; no
one understood why. The driver’s repeated whippings and commands
accomplished nothing; the horse simply would not budge.
The gentile knew that his yeast sales had hurt the Rabbi’s business. He was smart enough to understand that the horse’s strange
behavior was a warning from Heaven that he had done wrong. He
jumped off his wagon, knocked on Reb Dovid’s door, and begged
forgiveness for having caused anguish to him and his family — and
he promised not to sell another speck of yeast.
The gentile then returned to his wagon — and the horse started
down the road without a moment’s delay.

When he served as Rav of Starobin, Reb Dovid stopped at an inn
overnight while on a journey. The innkeeper recognized Reb Dovid,
who was famous as a rav and posek, and treated him
with great honor and respect. The innkeeper brought
his only urn into Reb Dovid’s room in case he desired
a cup of hot tea during the night.
A short while later, a chasan and kallah arrived at the inn. When
they asked the innkeeper for the use of his urn, he told them that
the urn was in the Starobiner Rav’s room, but he would ask the Rav
if they could borrow it for a short while.
When the request was put forth to Reb Dovid, he replied, “What
is the question? In fact, I think it would be best to keep the urn in
the room of the chasan and kallah the entire night; they deserve to
be treated royally.”
The chasan and kallah were
Rabbi and Mrs. Yosef Adler.
Years later, they emigrated
to America, where Rabbi
Adler became menahel of Mesivtha Tifereth
Jerusalem. Later, when
Reb Moshe came to
America and was being
considered for the position of Rosh Yeshivah at
Tifereth Jerusalem, Mrs.
Adler reminded her husband of the incident with
Reb Dovid and the urn.
“It is quite possible,” she said,
“that Reb Dovid’s son Reb Moshe
has the same wonderful middos that his
father had. If so, he will set a wonderful example for the talmidim. I
think you should appoint him as Rosh Yeshivah.” Rabbi Adler agreed
with his wife, and soon after, Reb Moshe became Rosh Yeshivah.
An act of kindness by Reb Dovid at an inn in Russia would result,
many years later, in his son being appointed as a Rosh Yeshivah in
America, and from that position, he would come to be recognized
as a gadol hador.


BS”D                        
Hama’aseh Hu Haikar 
Illuminating 
Chanukah  Stories 
2 
BSD 
Table of Contents: 
1. Mysterious Flame   
2. Midnight Light   
3. Menorah Jealousy ( 1 )   
4. Miracle in the Barracks   
5. One Last Wish   
6. Invisible Nine    
7. The Final Seal   
8. The Chanukah Gelt Story   
9. The Inextinguishable Flame   
10. Tall Man Short Wife   
11. Window Glow   
12. Candlelight Robbers   
13. The Broken Bottle   
14. The Chanukah Baby   
15. Chanukah Delight   
16. Menorah Jealousy ( 2 ) 
17. The Fifth Night of Chanukah Story 
Compiled from the L’Chaim Weekly’s ‘It Once Happened’ section by Rabbi Bentzion 
Elisha   
3

 
Mysterious  Flame   
It was the first night of Chanuka. Rabbi Baruch of Mezibuz, the grandson of 
the Baal Shem Tov, stood with a group of his Chasidim. With great 
concentration, he said the blessing over kindling the Chanuka lights and lit the 
first candle. 
The Chanuka candle was burning steadily when Rabbi Baruch and his Chasidim 
sat down around the menorah to sing Chanuka melodies. Suddenly, the flame 
began to shake and leap. It seemed to dance around in irritation. And then, the 
flame just disappeared. The candle didn't go out; no smoke arose. It was as if the 
flame flew away to another place. 
The Rebbe's assistant stood up to relight the Chanuka candles. But the Rebbe 
stopped him. "The Chanuka flame will return to us," he told his surprised 
Chasidim. "It has gone on an important mission," said the Rebbe quietly, 
mysteriously. 
Rabbi Baruch instructed his Chasidim to continue singing and discussion Torah 
thoughts. Close to midnight, a cry startled everyone. The Chasid who was sitting 
next to the menora called out, "Rebbe, the flame has returned!" 
Within moments, the group heard the faint sounds of a wagon. One of the 
Rebbe's chasidim entered the house. His clothes were torn, his hair disheveled, it 
was obviously painful for him to walk. But in direct contrast to his appearance, his 
eyes shone with happiness. 
"Just a few days ago, I left my house to come to our holy Rebbe for the Chanuka 
festival," began the chasid. "This is not the first time I have come to the Rebbe, 
and I know the way well from my many journeys. But this time, my traveling was 
very slow. I became worried that I would not arrive in time so I decided to travel 
day and night and eventually I would reach Mezibuz. 
"This was a foolish thing to do. But I realized that too late. Last night, a gang of 
bandits stopped me. They were overjoyed to find me. They were certain that if I 
was traveling at night I must be a very successful merchant who had important 
4 
business to attend to which could not wait. They insisted that I give them all of 
my money. 
"They would not believe me when I told them I only had the few coins which were 
in my bag. They cross-examined me and tortured me so that I would reveal 
where the rest of my money was. I, of course, had nothing to tell them. 
"After many hours of torture they sent me to a dark cellar. When their leader 
came to me, I tried to explain to him the great joy that one experiences when one 
is with the Rebbe and how important it had been to me to be with the Rebbe for 
Chanuka. It would seem that my words entered his heart or, perhaps, after he 
saw that all the tortures were futile, he began to believe me. Whatever the case, 
he told me: 
" 'I see that you are a person who believes in G-d and longs for his rabbi. Go on 
your way. But be advised that the path through this forest is very dangerous. It is 
filled with wild beasts. Even we do not travel through it alone. 
" 'If you succeed in making it through the forest, take your handkerchief and 
throw it in the ditch on the side of the road just after the signpost for the city. I 
will send a messenger tomorrow to see if it is there. In this way I will know that 
you have reached your destination. And, if you have, I promise you that I will 
leave my band of robbers and change my ways.' 
"I became frightened anew. But what choice did I have? When I thought of 
lighting the Chanuka candles with the Rebbe, though, I was strengthened. I 
retrieved my horse and wagon and resumed my journey through the pitch-black 
forest. 
"Not long after I began traveling, I saw ahead of me a pack of wild wolves. My 
horse refused to go any further. Suddenly, a tiny flame appeared in front of my 
horse and began leaping about. The flame went forward and the horse advanced. 
The rest of the way, the animals on all sides ran from before us as if the flame 
drove them away. 
5 
"This flame was with me until I arrived here. I threw my handkerchief in the ditch, 
and who knows? Maybe in the merit of this Chanuka candle, the band of 
criminals will return to a better path. 
The Chasid finished his story. And so the group of Chasidim understood to where 
their Rebbe's Chanuka flame had mysteriously disappeared. 


Midnight  Light  
The followers of Rabbi Dov Ber, the Maggid of Mezritch, awaited his 
entrance into the synagogue for the lighting of the Chanuka menorah on the first 
night of Chanuka. For the past few years, Reb Zushe, one of the Maggid's 
greatest disciples, had been honored with lighting the shamash candle. Reb 
Zushe would then hand it to the Maggid who lit his menorah from it. But Reb 
Zushe was nowhere to be seen and the chasidim wondered if his absence was the 
reason the Maggid had not yet lit the menorah. 
Minutes, then hours ticked by, as the chasidim waited for their Rebbe to emerge. 
Finally, at about midnight, the Maggid emerged from his room and walked 
towards the menorah. As if to himself, the Maggid said quietly, "Reb Zushe will 
not be with us tonight. We will light the menorah now." 
The Maggid honored another of his chasidim with the privilege of kindling the 
shamash for him, the blessings were chanted and the one, solitary wick was lit. 
Then all of the holy assemblage joined together in singing the traditional 
Chanuka hymns. 
The next morning, just as the Maggid and his chasidim were finishing the 
services, Reb Zushe walked in. Weary from traveling, Reb Zushe shuffled over to 
his customary place and dropped down on the bench. His friends came over and 
gave him a hearty welcome. One of them reported, "The Rebbe waited a long 
time for you last night. What happened?" 
"After we light the Chanuka menorah tonight," promised Reb Zushe, "and with 
the Rebbe's permission, I will tell you what happened." 
6 
All of the chasidim gathered around the Maggid's menorah on the second night 
of Chanuka. After the Maggid lit the menorah they eagerly listened to Reb 
Zushe's story: 
"As you all know, immediately after the High Holidays, it is my custom to travel 
throughout the small villages and hamlets near Mezritch. I go from town to town, 
speaking with the adults and teaching the children about the wonders of our 
heritage. I also speak to them about how G-d loves each and every single Jew and 
that they are all important to Him. I tell them about our Rebbe and explain some 
of the Rebbe's teachings. 
"Each year, I plan my schedule so that I can return to Mezritch in time for 
Chanuka. Yesterday, I was on my way back to Mezritch when a terrible 
snowstorm started. I pushed on through the storm, though many times I felt I 
could not continue. Knowing that I would soon be back in Mezritch near the 
Rebbe was what kept me going. 
"The storm worsened and I soon realized that I would have to stop and rest a bit 
before continuing, if I wanted to make it to Mezritch at all. And so, I stopped at 
the home of Yankel in a village not too far from Mezritch. By this time it was 
already quite late in the afternoon. I pounded and pounded on the door until 
finally, someone called out, 'Who is it?' 
"'It is I, Reb Zushe,' I said loudly. 
"Yankel's wife opened the door. She looked absolutely terrified as she bid me 
inside. I noticed that the children, too, looked frightened. 
"The poor woman burst out, 'Yankel left the house early this morning to gather 
firewood. He promised he would come back early, for even then he saw we were 
in for a terrible storm. It is late already and still he has not returned,' she wailed. 
"For a split second I hesitated. If I went into the forest now, who knew if I would 
come out alive? But I knew I had no choice. I put on my coat and scarf once again 
and set out toward the forest. 
"I passed a few rows of trees when I saw the upright form of a man covered with 
snow. Only his face was visible in that white blur. I saw right away that it was 
Yankel, and I thought for sure that he had frozen to death. But when I came very 
7 
close, I noticed to my surprise, that he was still breathing. I brushed Yankel off 
and tried to warm him up. 
"Somehow I managed to drag and carry Yankel back to his house where his wife 
and children greeted us with cries of joy. With my last ounce of strength I 
deposited Yankel on the bench near the stove and fell to the floor myself. 
Miraculously, Yankel's wife was able to "thaw" him out. She brought us a bottle 
of strong mashke which we drank eagerly to warm our insides. At about midnight 
we felt sufficiently strong enough to stand up and light the Chanuka menorah. As 
we said the prayer, 'who made miracles for our ancestors, in those days at this 
time," we knew without a doubt that G-d had made a miracle for us now, too. 
"As soon as the sun rose in the morning I set out for Mezritch and arrived when 
you saw me this morning." 
Reb Zushe finished his story. The Maggid looked deeply into Reb Zushe's face. 
"Know, Zushe, that in Heaven they waited - as it were - to light the Divine 
Chanuka menorah until you lit the menorah together with Yankel. In the merit of 
your saving a Jewish soul from death, the Heavens awaited you." 


Menorah  Jealousy ( 1 ) 
Everyone knew of the tzadik (righteous person) from Sassov, Rabbi Moshe 
Leib. Thousands of people constantly streamed to him to ask for blessings and 
advice on personal and business matters, and he never refused them his precious 
time. 
Once, when Rabbi Moshe Leib was visiting the town of Brod, a wealthy woman 
came to him to ask him to pray for the recovery of her daughter who was 
seriously ill. When the woman introduced herself and mentioned her father's 
name, Rabbi Moshe Leib realized that he knew of her family, who were famous 
for their generosity to the needy. 
As the conversation progressed the wealthy woman described her child's illness, 
and the tzadik promised to pray for her. As it was customary to give the tzadik a 
8 
monetary donation to distribute among the poor or for a specific urgent cause, 
the woman removed an envelope from her purse and placed it on the table, but 
Rabbi Moshe Leib refused to accept it. "I don't want money from you!" he said. 
"But Rabbi, what do you mean? What is it that you want from me? I will do 
anything in the world to help my daughter!" 
"I know that you have a very beautiful and precious Chanuka menorah. That is 
what I want!" Rabbi Moshe Leib said quietly. 
"Rabbi, I do have the menorah you describe, but it is a family heirloom and my 
most precious possession. However, if you want it, I will gladly give it to you!" 
The Rebbe listened carefully, nodding his head. "I am aware that the menorah is 
very special and precious to your family. If you agree to let me have it, you must 
mean this most sincerely; you must give it to me with no compunctions or inner 
doubts whatsoever." 
"I understand completely, and I agree wholeheartedly. The menorah is yours; I 
will bring it to you today," the woman said in a strong, firm voice. 
That evening, when she came and presented the menorah to Rabbi Moshe Leib, 
his students were buzzing with amazement. How had the Rebbe known about 
the menorah’s existence? Why had the Rebbe asked for a gift, something so far 
out of character? And why in the world did he want it anyway, when it was a 
known fact that he used only the menorah he had received from his teacher and 
Rebbe, Reb Shmelke of Nicholsburg? 
On the first night of Chanuka, as the Rebbe prepared to light the first wick, Reb 
Yechiel Tzoref the silversmith stood at his side. He had no idea why he had been 
chosen for this great honor, but he was beaming with happiness. After the light 
was kindled, the Rebbe beckoned to Reb Yechiel to enter his study. "I want to tell 
you a story about your grandfather, may he rest in peace, for whom you were 
named. 
"When the time came for your grandfather to arrange a match for his daughter, 
he was so poor, he couldn't find a suitor. No one would lend him money, since it 
was obvious he could never return the loan. After exhausting all of his 
acquaintances he decided to approach a certain very wealthy man. When he 
9 
asked him to lend him money to arrange a marriage for his daughter, the wealthy 
man replied, 'I know you will never be able to repay me, but I will make a deal 
with you. I know that you own a very beautiful menorah, the likes of which I have 
never seen. If you will give it to me, I will give you 10,000 gulden, enough for the 
marriage and even more!' 
"When Reb Yechiel heard the demand, he was shocked. It was his most precious 
possession. He, himself, had made it from silver coins that his Rebbe, Reb Zushe 
of Anipoli, had distributed to his Chasidim each year as Chanuka 'gelt.' Reb 
Yechiel had collected the prized coins year by year. When he had amassed quite a 
collection, Reb Yechiel melted them down and formed from them a magnificent 
menorah. It was this menorah which the rich man wanted. No, thought Reb 
Yechiel, he couldn't even think of relinquishing it. 
"Having refused the rich man's offer, Reb Yechiel went everywhere to try to 
borrow the money, but in the end he failed. He had no choice but to accept the 
rich man's terms and part with his beloved menorah. When the wealthy man 
passed away and stood before the Heavenly Court there was great confusion as 
to how to rule in his case. On the one hand, the rich man had certainly performed 
the mitzva (commandment) of giving money to help poor brides. But on the 
other hand, he had coveted the prized possession of a poor man and caused him 
great pain. 
"Finally, the Court reached a decision. The wealthy man's reward would be 
withheld, since the mitzva was intertwined with the sin of coveting the 
possession of another. 
"That is why I have arranged to return the menorah to you, his grandson. The sin 
has now been atoned for, and the wealthy benefactor of your grandfather will 
rest in peace, enjoying his eternal reward." 


Miracle in the Barracks 
Life in the Siberian work camps was generally difficult for the Jewish 
prisoners, but during the holidays it was even more so, because it was nearly 
10 
impossible to perform the mitzvot (commandments) of each holiday under those 
terrible conditions. 
Reb Asher Sosonkin was exiled to Siberia for the "crime" of spreading Torah 
throughout Russia. Even under the harsh conditions of the work camp, he did his 
best to continue to observe the Torah and mitzvot. In the camp with Reb Asher 
was a Jew by the name of Nachman Rosemann. He had been brought up in an 
observant home, but when he grew up he became an ardent communist, rising in 
the ranks of the Russian army. After serving in the army, he was arrested for 
illegal business dealings, and was sentenced to 25 years of hard labor in Siberia. 
It was there in the work camp that Nachman felt a renewed interest in Judaism, 
and this led him to befriend the devout Reb Asher. Nachman was determined to 
learn all he could from Reb Nachman, and to do the mitzvot as carefully possible. 
Chanuka was approaching, and Reb Asher asked Nachman to get a tin can to use 
as a menorah, in order to fulfill the mitzva of kindling the Chanuka lights. Reb 
Asher emphasized that it should be small, so that their activities wouldn't be 
noticed by any of the labor camp officials. 
"On Chanuka we celebrate a tremendous miracle, the triumph of the small 
Jewish army over the enormous Greek army. It is the victory of the spiritual over 
the physical. To simply make a menorah out of an old can wouldn't properly 
honor this holiday. I'm going to order a beautiful menorah!" Nachman 
proclaimed. 
Reb Asher was amazed at his determination. Nachman found a prisoner who 
happened to be a tinsmith and paid him several rubles to make a beautiful 
menorah. He did this knowing that if the authorities found out, he would be 
punished severely. And on the day before Chanuka, Nachman approached Reb 
Asher with a big smile. In one hand he held a menorah, and in the other hand he 
held a bottle filled with oil. 
On the first night of Chanuka, Reb Asher and Nachman placed the menorah by 
the door post of their barrack and prepared a cotton wick. The other prisoners 
watched curiously as the two men commenced this "dangerous" act. Reb Asher 
recited the three blessings over the lighting of the menorah, and lit the wick with 
tears of joy and gratitude. 
11 
They continued to light the menorah in this way until the fifth night of Chanuka. 
Just as Reb Asher and Nachman had lit the menorah, an armed guard appeared 
at the entrance of the barracks, announcing roll call. The prisoners were stunned. 
Roll call had never been announced at that hour before! The other prisoners told 
Reb Asher and Nachman that someone must have reported them, which would 
explain the unusual roll call. They advised the two men to hide their menorah in 
the snow, before the officer arrived. They refused to bury the menorah. 
When the officer entered the barrack, everyone stood still, anticipating the 
worst. After the officer finished counting the prisoners, he noticed the menorah. 
He stared at it for a moment, and then he asked Reb Asher, "Five?" "Five," replied 
Reb Asher, confused. The officer nodded his head, and without another word, 
turned and left the barracks. The prisoners were shocked. They were all 
wondering the same things: Who was the officer? Why did he come to them at 
such an unusual hour and ask about the candles? 
Reb Asher was sure that the "officer" was none other than the Prophet Elijah. 


One  Last  Wish 
Pesachya could never get used to it. Every year, he would go to the shelf, 
take down the family Menorah, and place it carefully in his suitcase. Then, with a 
bitter sigh, he would say to his wife, "So I won't be with you and the children for 
Chanukah once again this year. What can I do. I must be in the forests to 
supervise the wood-cutting." 
"Maybe this year will be different," his wife had said, for this past summer 
Pesachya had received a special blessing. It had been quite unexpected. 
Pesachya was paying his yearly visit to Rabbi Sholom Dov Ber of Lubavitch. 
"Pesachya," the Rebbe had said quietly, "no doubt it is hard for you to be away 
from home at Chanukah time. 
"This year, be sure to take along a supply of big candles. May the Al-mighty bless 
you with a bright Chanukah, and give you much success in the business too." 
12 
Pesachya was astonished, speechless. It was as if the Rebbe had looked into the 
hidden areas of his heart to discover that old pain. 
The Rebbe had spoken very naturally, but his words were puzzling. As Pesachya 
dutifully went to purchase "the big candles," he wondered what the Rebbe really 
had in mind. 
When Chanukah came, Pesachya remembered the Rebbe's instructions. Every 
morning he rose early to study and pray. Then, before leaving the cabin, he 
would check to make sure that he had the right number of candles with him to 
light that evening. 
One morning, Pesachya awoke a little later than usual. Hurriedly he bundled 
himself up, and ran down the forest path. Suddenly he realized that he had 
forgotten the Chanukah candles. Another delay, he thought. Maybe he should 
leave them until later. No. Better go back and get them after all. 
Despite the late start, the day turned out well. Finally, as it grew dark, Pesachya 
dismissed his workers and began to trudge toward his lonely cabin. 
"Stop Jew!" said a gruff voice, sending a chill of fear down his spine. Pesachya 
looked up, as a rough band of woodsmen laid hold of him, the tallest brandishing 
a large axe. 
"Robbers! Help!" he cried, but no one heard a sound. One grabbed him from 
behind. Another stunned him with a blow. "Don't fight or we'll kill you!" they said. 
Roughly they search him, taking his jacket and his money belt. Then with a 
shove, they threw him down on the icy dark road. 
Pesachya's head pounded as he heard a voice say, "Hold him steady. Let's get it 
over with." 
"Wait, wait!" cried Pesachya desperately. "Don't kill me, Please. Spare my life. I 
beg you. I have a wife, children. Mercy!" 
"Quiet!" a voice growled. "You can forget about them." 
13 
"Master of the World," said Pesachya to himself, and cried out the Shema Yisrael 
prayer. 
Suddenly he remembered the candles. "Wait, listen," he begged. "If these are my 
last minutes, let me at least light the candles for the holiday of Chanukah." 
"All right, if that's your last wish. But make it quick," the robbers said. 
With trembling fingers, Pesachya took out the candles and stuck them in a 
mound of snow by the roadside. With tears streaming down his face, he recited 
the blessings, and kindled the tall candles. 
As he watched them he thought of his family, his poor children, so many miles 
away. The he remembered the way the Rebbe had looked at him that last 
summer, and his mind was full of the vision of his holy face. 
Suddenly he heard a shout. "Stop where you are, all of you." The forest was 
bristling with armed men. "You're all under arrest." 
The Duke's private soldiers rushed forward, grabbing the robbers, and holding 
them at gunpoint. 
"At last we'll make these woods safe," said a man dressed in warm furs, whom 
Pesachya recognized as the wealthy Duke, owner of the forest. 
"You...you saved my life," cried Pesachya. "How did you find me?" 
"Why, your candles," said the Duke. "We noticed them from the main road as we 
rode by. They led us right to you. 
"They're for your holiday, aren't they?" the Duke said curiously. "It just shows, a 
bit of religion never hurts, does it?" 
Pesachya smiled gratefully. "I..I can never thank you enough." 
And as he spoke, his eyes filled with a look of wonder, as he realized at last what 
the Rebbe had meant. 
Reprinted from The Moshiach Times magazine. 
14 


Invisible  Nine 
by Simon Jacobson, as heard from a Holocaust survivor, who was an 11-year-old 
child in the camps. Today he is living in the United States. 
Chanukah 1944, Auschwitz 
I will never forget the last Chanukah in the barracks. Most of us were so 
consumed with scraping together any morsel while avoiding the attention of the 
guards that we had no inkling which day in the year it was. Especially in those last 
weeks before the liberation, the Nazis were particularly unpredictable and cruel, 
and the chaos only made matters worse. 
Yet there were a few who always knew the exact dates. They would tell the rest 
of us that today is Shabbos, Pesach and other significant days. On this particular 
day a man would tell me that it was Chanukah. 
That morning I went to the infirmary to try smuggling out some balm - anything 
to help relieve my father's open sores. His disease - I am not sure what it was - 
was eating his body away, and whenever I could sneak over to see him I would 
see him silently struggling for some relief. As a child I was completely overcome 
by the sight of my suffering father. 
That particular day, when I finally snuck over to my father's bunk, he was no 
longer there. I became frantic. 
An older gentleman, whom I did not know but I had often seen talking to my 
father, came over to console me. He too did not know when my father was taken, 
to this day I don't know if it was the disease or a Nazi bullet that took my father to 
heaven, but his was a calming presence. 
15 
He told me that today was Chanukah and we celebrate the victory of the few 
weak over the many powerful oppressors. We light the candles to demonstrate 
that our light is stronger than any darkness. "Your father would be very proud to 
know that you carry on his light despite the blackness around us," he said. 
I was so moved by his words - and all the memories it brought back from my 
earlier years in Lodz - that I suggested to him enthusiastically that we should light 
the menorah tonight. He sort of smiled to me, the child - a smile hardly 
concealing his deep anguish - and said that it would be too dangerous to try. I 
insisted and made off to get some machine oil from the factory. 
I was so excited. And for this brief moment I was able to put aside my grief. I 
slowly made my way back, so not to be noticed, to the barrack with my treasured 
bit of oil. Meanwhile the strange gentleman had put together some wicks, 
apparently from clothing or some other material. 
Now we needed fire to light our makeshift menorah. I noticed at the end of one 
building smoldering cinders. We agreed that we would wait till dusk and at an 
opportune moment we would light our Chanukah lights 
Wait we did. As we were walking over to the cinders a guard noticed us and 
grabbed away the oil and wicks we were concealing. He began cursing and 
frothing at us. A miracle seemed to happen when his superior barked a command 
that apparently needed his participation, and he ran off with our precious fuel. 
The miracle however was short-lived. The animal yelled back at us that he would 
soon return to "take care of us." 
I was terrified. The gentleman was absolutely serene. And then he said to me 
words that are etched into my every fiber until this very day: 
"Tonight we have lit a flame more powerful than the Chanukah lights. The 
miracle of Chanukah consisted of finding one crucible of oil, which miraculously 
burned for eight days. Tonight we performed an even greater miracle: We lit the 
ninth invisible candle even when we had no oil... 
"Make no mistake. We did light the Menorah tonight. We did everything in our 
power to kindle the flames, and every effort is recognized by G-d. He knows that 
we were deprived by forces that were not in our control, so in some deeper way 
16 
we lit the Menorah. We have lit the ninth flame - the most powerful one of all, so 
powerful that you can't even see it." 
The man then promised me: "You will get out of here alive. And when you do, 
take this ninth invisible flame with you. Tell G-d that we lit a candle even when 
we had no oil. 
"Tell the world of the light that has emerged even from the darkest of darkness. 
We had no physical oil and no spiritual oil. We were wretched creatures, treated 
worse than animals. Yet, in some miraculous way, we found a 'crucible' where 
none existed - in the hell fires of Auschwitz. 
"So there was no oil. Not even defiled oil. No oil, period. Yet we still lit a flame - a 
flame fueled by the pits of darkness. We never gave up. Let the world know that 
our ninth flame is alive and shining. Tell every person in despair that the flame 
never goes out." 
As he finished these last words, the Nazi beast returned and viciously led him 
away behind one of the barracks. 
I made my escape. A few weeks later the Russians arrived and we were liberated.  
Here I am today to tell you the story of the ‘ninth flame.’ 


The  Final  Seal 
Once, after the long and joyous prayers of Rosh Hashanah, Reb Yehuda 
Tzvi made a mysterious comment to his Chasidim: "During the lighting of the 
fifth Chanukah candle, if you will remind me at that moment, I will prepare a 
banquet for everyone!" 
The Chasidim looked at their Rebbe and thought to themselves, "What is the 
connection between Rosh Hashanah and Chanukah?" Others wondered, "Why a 
banquet on the fifth night? Why not every night!?" 
17 
The fifth night of Chanukah came and the Chasidim reminded their Rebbe of his 
promise. He immediately ordered a banquet prepared for all the guests. After 
many l'chaims someone stood up courageously and asked, "Rebbe, what is the 
occasion of the banquet?" 
Rabbi Yehuda Tzvi explained, "I saw during the sacred prayers of Rosh Hashanah 
that a tzadik (a righteous person) of our generation would be appointed one of 
the judges of the heavenly court. I knew there were three possibilities. Either 
myself, the Rebbe of Butzchatch or Rebbe Tzvi Elimelech of Dinov. I prayed with 
all my heart to the Creator that I wasn't worthy to be a judge of the heavenly 
court. It wasn't clear to me what the heavenly decision would be until this 
moment. For as you all know Chanukah is the final seal of whatever happened on 
Rosh Hashanah. Now I know that I wasn't chosen. That is why I have made this 
banquet." 
Soon thereafter the news spread that the Rabbi Tzvi Elimelech of Dinov had been 
chosen to be a judge of the heavenly court. 


The Chanukah Gelt 
Story  
The good news spread throughout town. Rebbe Mordechai of Chernobyl 
would be visiting soon to celebrate the first days of Chanukah! In addition to the 
usual excitement that a Chasid feels when he has the chance to see his Rebbe, 
there were others things to be excited about, as well. 
The Rebbe would honor one of his Chasidim with hosting him for the evening tea. 
At this "tea party," which all of the chasidim would attend, the Rebbe would 
speak words of Torah that would delight the souls of his Chasidim. 
For another, the Rebbe would bless the host at the end of the evening with 
material and spiritual bounty. Lastly, everyone knew that the 18 gold rubles that 
18 
the Rebbe "charged" for the honor of hosting him would be distributed to charity. 
Thus, the host would give charity through the Rebbe's own holy hand. 
Itche the Miser went with all of the other Chasidim to greet the Rebbe when he 
arrived in town. Itche's father had been a prominent businessman. Like his father, 
Itche was also a Chasid. Unlike his father, Itche's main focus in life was his 
business, his luxurious home and all of its exquisite furnishings. Also unlike his 
father, Itche found it hard to part with even a copper for a charitable cause. 
So, one can only imagine how Itche felt when the Rebbe arrived, looked straight 
at him, and suggested, "Itche, would you like to host me for tea?" 
Of course, Itche said, "It would be my honor Rebbe." Inwardly, though, Itche 
panicked. Tea with the Rebbe and all of his Chasidim! Why, they would destroy 
his home! Then an idea came to him; he would stand at his front door and allow 
only the Rebbe in. A marvelous plan! Itche was relieved. It would cost him 18 gold 
rubles but at least his expensive carpets and antiques would remain intact. 
Itche was sure his idea would work until the Rebbe said, "Itche, could you please 
personally transport me from my lodgings to your home?" 
Now Itche's mind worked feverishly. If he picked up the Rebbe in his carriage and 
they drove quickly to Itche's home, they would arrive long before the Chasidim 
who were traveling on foot and he would still have time to bolt the front door so 
that no one else could enter. Ahhh, Itche sighed in relief once more. 
Finally it was the first night of Chanukah. Itche lit the Chanukah menorah with his 
family. He sat by the Chanukah lights for a little while. He took one last look at his 
beautiful home and then went to pick up the Rebbe. When Itche arrived, the 
Rebbe lit the Menorah and recited the blessings after which the Chasidim all 
answered "Amen." Then they began to sing niggunim, wordless soul melodies, as 
the Rebbe meditated on the light of the small flame. An air of tranquility 
permeated the room, except in Itche's corner. 
Finally, the Rebbe motioned to Itche that they would go now. Itche pressed his 
coachman to drive as quickly as possible, certain that with G-d's help he could put 
a fair distance between his carriage and the Chasidim. 
19 
But, halfway through the journey, the Rebbe ordered the carriage to stop. He 
turned to Itche and said, "I didn't realize your house was so far. Such a long 
journey was not included in my original price. If you want me to come any further 
you must pay me another 18 gold rubles." With the Chasidim nearly catching up, 
Itche had no choice but to agree. Eighteen gold rubles was still less than it would 
cost to replace his precious carpets and furniture! 
Within a few moments, they arrived at Itche's home. The Rebbe stared intently at 
the 15 steps that led up to Itche's front door. "I had no idea that you had so many 
steps, dear Itche. That was not included in my original price. If you want me to go 
inside your home, you must pay me 18 gold rubles for each step!" 
Itche nearly fainted. Before he had a chance to respond, the Chasidim - who had 
caught up - accompanied the Rebbe up the stairs and inside. 
The scene that unfolded before Itche's eyes was just what he had imagined. He 
was not able to concentrate on even one holy word that the Rebbe taught about 
Chanukah. The evening finally came to an end and Itche breathed a sigh of relief. 
As the Rebbe was about to leave, Itche suddenly remembered to ask the Rebbe 
to bless his family. Surely this would make up for everything. 
Quickly Itche gathered together his children and grandchildren and requested, 
"Rebbe, please bless my family." 
"Bless your family?" the Rebbe looked at Itche in surprise. "I have no blessing for 
them," he said, and sadly turned away. 
Itche felt as if the earth had opened beneath his feet. "Rebbe," Itche cried out, in 
a voice filled with desperation. The Rebbe looked at Itche long and hard. "In order 
for me to bless your family, you will have to sign over your entire fortune to me," 
the Rebbe said seriously. 
How could he sign over everything to the Rebbe? He would be penniless! Itche 
felt like he was drowning. Moments of eternity passed. But then, he looked into 
the Rebbe's eyes and saw within them compassion. With his last ounce of 
strength he said, "If that is what I must do, then I will do it." And then he fainted. 
In a haze, Itche heard the Rebbe saying, "Mazel tov, Itche, mazel tov!" The Rebbe 
began to bless Itche and his entire family. "May you and your family know only 
20 
joy and health and prosperity from now on." For many moments, blessings 
flowed from the Rebbe's lips, each one greater than the previous one. 
"Know, Itche, that you have just fought a great battle with your evil inclination. 
Until a few moments ago, you did not own your wealth, your evil inclination 
owned it! When you agreed to give me all of your possessions, I was able to wrest 
your wealth from your evil inclination. I now return it to you as Chanukah gelt 
(money). Use it well, dear Itche. Henceforth, use it well." 
Itche thanked the Rebbe and began to take hundreds of gold rubles notes from 
his wallet. But the Rebbe declined. "I only accept 18 gold rubles for tea." 
Henceforth, Itche was a changed man and his home was entirely different. Itche 
generously shared his "Chanukah gelt" throughout the entire year. 


The Inextinguishable Flame  
by Menachem Zeigelbaum 
A small wooden house stood on the side of the steep mountain as though 
hiding in its shadow. As far as the eye could see, were the majestic Carpathian 
Mountains. The Divine creation was visible in all its glory. 
A young couple lived in this house. They had married only a few months before, 
and now they were building their lives quietly and peacefully. 
The wife was called Rachel and the husband was called Yisrael. When he became 
the Rebbe of the Jewish people, he was called Rabbi Yisrael Baal Shem Tov. 
Despite his youth, his appearance and demeanor reflected profound wisdom and 
understanding. His eyes always radiated joy, and his face bespoke a deep 
tranquility. 
His young wife Rochel was content, and this was despite the fact that she hardly 
ever saw her husband. Throughout the week, Yisrael left home and walked 
through the forests that covered the Carpathian mountains. He would leave 
Sunday morning and return Friday afternoon, before Shabbat. Rochel was happy 
because she knew her husband was an outstanding tzadik, a holy man. Most 
21 
people didn't know this. She knew, though her husband hid it from others. The 
time for his greatness to be revealed to the world had not yet arrived. 
It was the height of winter and snow fell and covered all in its white blanket. It 
was almost Chanukah, the holiday of light, joy, and warmth. 
On Sunday Yisrael went out as he usually did. Before leaving, he said to Rachel, 
"With G-d's help, I hope to return with nightfall of the first night of Chanukah in 
order to light the menorah. But if, G-d forbid, I tarry and don't come till night, 
don't wait for me. Light the menorah yourself so as not to delay this great 
mitzvah (commandment)." 
The days passed quickly. In a few minutes it would be nightfall and the first 
Chanukah light would be lit in all Jewish homes. Yisrael had set out to return 
home much earlier but his progress home had been slow. Though dusk was 
approaching, the light of the joy of a mitzvah illuminated his visage. 
Yisrael's high boots sank deeply into the snow. The thick stick cleared the path 
before him. A fur hat, like the peasant farmers wore, was on his head. The bitter 
cold and the piercing mountain winds whipped his face. 
The forest paths disappeared and the tangle of branches became ever thicker. 
Yisrael found himself walking in circles, but he maintained his trust in G-d. 
The hour grew late and the time for lighting the menorah had long since passed. 
Yisrael so wanted to light the menorah at the proper time. He knew that each 
year, at the time that the menorah is lit, the "hidden light," the light of Moshiach, 
is revealed. But something, some force, seemed to block Yisrael's way. 
A strange heaviness took hold of Yisrael. He found it difficult to continue walking 
against the howling wind. He finally sat down on a rock that stood among the 
trees. Yisrael sat there, exhausted. Another two minutes went by and he fell 
asleep. The shrieking wind and the sound of the trees branches moving above 
awoke him from his slumber. To his surprise it seemed to him that he could see a 
figure approaching. 
Yisrael saw a figure in white, holding a large candle, walking towards him. The 
figure came closer and he could see a tall, distinguished looking Jew with a white 
beard framing his shining face. 
"Who are you?" asked Yisrael. 
22 
The man smiled and said, "I am Matityahu the Priest from Modiin, a 
Hasmonean." 
Yisrael blinked his eyes and the man was no longer nearby but far, far ahead. He 
quickly got up in order to follow the man with the candle. The flame danced on, 
the winds powerless to extinguish it. Yisrael walking without knowing how much 
time had elapsed, until he finally began to recognize his surroundings. He noticed 
some familiar signs, roads that he had frequented. In another few minutes, he 
identified the paths that led to his house. 
From a distance, he could see a tiny flame in the window of his house. A pure 
flame that had been kindled by his wife. Despite the severe cold, she stood in the 
doorway, outside the house, wrapped in her heavy coat and fur hat. She was 
relieved and overjoyed to see her husband finally approaching. It was long past 
midnight and she had been worried. 
Yisrael looked right and left, but there was no trace of the man who had led him 
home. 
A few minutes later, the Baal Shem Tov was standing in front of his tin menorah. 
He prepared the wicks, poured the oil, and with lofty, mystical intentions, he 
recited the blessings. When he finished reciting the poetic songs that follow the 
lighting, dawn began to break over the snowy Carpathian Mountains. 
Reprinted from Beis Moshiach Magazine 


Tall  Man  Short  Wife 
by Yerachmiel Tilles 
All of his Chasidim strove to be present when Rabbi David of Tolna kindled 
his Chanukah lights. It was a powerful event. The Rebbe would be intensely 
23 
focused and in an exalted state and his Menorah in itself was something quite 
impressive. It was made of pure gold, and magnificently crafted with intricate 
designs. The Chasidim who merited to be in the house would be inspired, and the 
nights of Chanukah would be filled with joyous festive songs and melodies. 
One year, on the first night of Chanukah, just before the time to light the flame, 
the Rebbe was standing before the menorah, involved in his last-moment inner 
preparations. The crowd of chasidim pressed around him. Unexpectedly, the 
Rebbe turned to a certain chasid and said, "I know that your wife is quite short. 
When you need to speak to her, what do you do? Do you bend over towards her 
or does she raise herself up to your height?" 
Immediately upon uttering this remarkable question, the Rebbe began his recital 
of the Chanukah blessings and lit his golden menorah. 
The astonished man to whom the Rebbe had directed his question, as well as all 
the other Chasidim of Tolna, were totally bewildered by the Rebbe's mysterious 
words. No one could even begin to suggest what the Rebbe could possibly have 
meant. 
Standing among the Chasidim at the time was Rabbi Mordechai Dov of 
Hornsteipel, a grandson of one of the Rebbe's sisters, who was already known as 
a tzadik. He had come to visit with his relatives for a while. Seeing how perplexed 
the Chasidim were by their Rebbe's words, he cleared his throat and addressed 
them. 
"Shall I explain to you what my holy great-uncle said? It is taught in Kabbala that 
'The Divine Presence never descends lower than ten tefachim (handbreadths) 
from the ground.' The one exception is the Chanukah light. According to its law, 
ideally it should be lit at a height of less than ten tefachim (about eighty 
centimeters/two feet, but higher than three tefachim) above the ground. Then 
the Divine Presence will descend to 'lower than ten.' 
"The holy Ari of Safed stated that this secret of the descent of the Divine 
Presence is the mystical root of the Talmudic statement, 'If your wife is short, 
bend over and whisper to her.' It is this secret that the Rebbe, my great-uncle, 
wished to hint at and invoke with his words to that tall Chasid." 
24 
The next evening, when it was time to kindle the second light, the Rebbe of Tolna 
turned to a different Chasid, and again said something baffling that no one could 
penetrate. Then, as he turned back to the menorah, he addressed his great
nephew and remarked, "This time you will not be able to decipher it for them." 
And so it was. 
Translated and freely adapted from Sipurei Chasidim-Festivals for 
www.AscentOfSafed.com.  
Yerachmiel Tilles is a founder of Ascent in Tzfas and director of 
www.KabbalaOnline.org 


Window  Glow 
Private, W. was with the United States Army as it marched through Europe 
at the end of World War II. His unit was assigned to a village with the orders to 
secure the town and search for any hidden Nazis. While there, they were to help 
the villagers in any way they could. 
The private was on patrol one night when he saw a young boy running through a 
field just outside the village. "Halt or I'll shoot," he shouted. The boy ducked 
behind a tree. The private waited patiently. 
Eventually the boy came out. Figuring that the soldier was no longer nearby, the 
boy went to a spot near a large tree and started to dig. Private W. waited 
patiently again, this time until the boy had finished digging and was on the move 
once more. He stepped out and shouted, "Halt or I'll shoot!" The boy ran but 
Private W. decided not to shoot. Instead, he began pursuing the furtive figure. He 
caught up with the boy and tackled him to the ground. 
In the scuffle that ensued, the boy dropped an ornate Chanukah menorah that he 
had been holding tightly against his chest. Private W. picked up the menorah. 
The boy tried to grab it back shouting, "Give it to me. It's mine!" 
25 
Private W. looked deeply into the frightened youth's eyes and assured him that 
he was among friends. "I myself am Jewish," he told the youngster. 
The boy, who had survived the concentration camp, was mistrustful of all men in 
uniforms. He had been forced to watch the shooting of his father. He had no idea 
what had become of his mother. 
In the weeks that followed, Private W. took an interest in the young boy's 
welfare. The boy, David, became closer and closer with the American soldier. 
Private W.'s heart went out to the boy. He offered to bring David with him to the 
United States, to New York City where he lived. David accepted and Private W. 
went through all the necessary paperwork to officially adopted David. 
Private W., now Mr. W. and back in the private sector, was active in the New York 
Jewish community. An acquaintance of his, a curator of the Jewish Museum in 
New York City, saw the menorah. He told David it was very valuable, a relic of 
European Jewry, and should be shared with the entire Jewish Community. He 
offered David $50,000 for the menorah. 
David refused the generous offer, saying the menorah had been in his family for 
over 200 years and that no amount of money would ever make him part with it. 
When Chanukah came, David and the Mr. W. lit the menorah in the window of 
their home in New York City. David went to his room to study and Mr. W. stayed 
in the room with the menorah. 
The quiet stillness of the house was interrupted by a knock on the door. Mr. W. 
went to answer the door. A woman speaking with a strong German accent stood 
before him. She seemed flustered and excused herself for intruding. She had 
been walking down the street when she looked up and saw the menorah in the 
window. 
"We once had a menorah just like that in our family," she said in broken English. 
She had never seen any other like it. Could she come and take a closer look? 
Mr. W. invited her in to look at the menorah. He said that the menorah belonged 
to his son who could perhaps tell her more about it. Mr. W. called David from his 
room to tell the woman more about the menorah’s history. 
26 
In the mystic glow of the ancient Chanukah menorah, David was reunited with his 
mother. 


Candlelight Robbers 
Once there lived a wealthy Jewish forester named Yosef. Yosef was very 
kind and generous. He understood that G-d had blessed him with great wealth so 
that he could help others, and he was always ready to give to the poor. Not only 
did he give them money, he gave them jobs. He was happy that by giving 
employment to his fellow Jews, he could enable them to support their families. 
As Yosef's wealth increased, so did his charitable deeds. One day, a group of Jews 
from a nearby village came to see him. "We've come to ask you to help a needy 
bride and groom," said one of the group, Yonah the shoemaker. "They are both 
orphans, and there is no one to help them. They're getting married on Chanukah, 
and they haven't any money." 
"How much money do you need?" asked Yosef. 
"One thousand rubles should be enough," said Yonah. 
Yosef went to his desk and took out a packet of money. He counted out a 
thousand rubles, and handed it to Yonah with a smile. The villagers were 
stunned. They thought that Yosef would give part of the amount, and expected 
to collect the rest from others. They could not thank Yosef enough. 
As they left, Yosef said, "Remember to invite me to the wedding. I want to 
participate in the great mitzvah of rejoicing with the bride and groom." 
Some weeks later, Yosef travelled to Danzig where he had to collect payment 
from a number of his customers. He expected to be away for at least three weeks 
and told his family regretfully that he did not think he would be home in time to 
kindle the menorah with them on the first night of Chanukah. 
Yosef's stay in Danzig was blessed with success. Not only did he collect over 
40,000 rubles, he signed on many new customers. He finished up his business 
27 
more quickly than expected and was delighted that he would be able to surprise 
his family and arrive home in time to light the first Chanukah candle. 
Yosef purchased a ticket for the train ride home and entered a car that was not 
too crowded. He sat down, closed his eyes and dozed off. Suddenly, he heard 
voices whispering next to him. Opening his eyes, he saw two men sitting across 
from him, eying him suspiciously. 
Yosef's heart skipped a beat as he thought, "They are planning to rob me!" Yosef 
quickly got up. He went from one car to the next, until he came to a car that was 
packed with people. He looked for an empty place, and sat down. 
"Thank G-d, I managed to escape from those men just in time!" he said to 
himself. The car was crowded with farmers and peasants. Yosef felt much safer 
surrounded by people. 
The train sped on its journey. Gradually it grew dark outside and all the 
passengers fell asleep, except for the wary Yosef. Suddenly, he noticed the two 
strangers standing at the doorway of the car. Yosef opened his bag and took out 
the gun that he always carried. He made sure the men could see that he had it. 
The men quickly disappeared. Yosef realized his suspicions were right. 
For the remainder of the trip, Yosef stayed alert. He prayed to G-d to protect 
him, pledging to give charity even more generously when he returned home 
safely. When Yosef got off the train, he went over to a policeman, handed him 
several rubles, and asked him to escort him home. 
When he finally arrived at home, Yosef breathed a sigh of relief. But no one was 
home. He realized that his family and servants were all still in the city as they had 
not expected him to arrive until later in the week. "What a shame," Yosef thought 
to himself as he began preparing the oil and wicks of the menorah for the first 
night of Chanukah, "after all my efforts to get here, I am still alone." 
Yosef placed the 40,000 rubles in his safe. Then he retraced his steps back to the 
family's silver menorah, recited the blessings with much joy and watched the first 
light of Chanukah dance with delight. 
All was still in the house. Yosef sat by the candles for a while, and then took out a 
book and began to study. The stillness was shattered by the sound of splintering 
28 
wood. Yosef jumped up and saw his two "travel companions" from the train 
bursting though the front door. 
Brandishing guns, the thieves demanded that Yosef open up his safe and empty 
it out for them. They then tied him up with heavy rope and threw him on the 
ground. Yosef prayed to G-d, knowing that his life was in grave danger. 
Suddenly, sounds of voices and musical instruments could be heard from outside. 
The music kept getting closer and louder. The thieves turned pale, and began 
looking for a way to escape, but it was too late. 
From outside they heard happy shouts. "Reb Yosef. Open up. We've come to 
bring you to the wedding." The villagers marched through the open door. They 
saw Reb Yosef lying tied up on the floor and then they saw the thieves. They 
pounced on the villains, and easily overpowered them. 
Yonah the shoemaker untied Reb Yosef. "We came to bring you to the wedding, 
as you asked," he said. "And look at this!" 
"You saved my life!" Yosef exclaimed. "They would have killed me!" 
"Surely your mitzvot of endowing a bride, looking after orphans, and the desire 
to rejoice at a wedding saved you," said Yonah. 
The villagers escorted Reb Yosef to the wedding with much joy. As Yosef 
watched the happy dancing, he thanked G-d for all the miracles, the wonders and 
the salvation that had just occurred for him. 


The  Broken  Bottle  
Avraham Pinchas lived 100 years ago in Baghdad. The wealthy Jewish 
merchant usually had a table full of guests, but this Shabbat he only had one, a 
poor man he had invited home from the synagogue. The guest was awed by the 
plush richness around him: the thick Persian rugs, gold inlayed dishes and 
beautifully decorated walls. Only one thing perplexed him: in the middle of the 
29 
table stood an old, empty, broken bottle that looked as if it had once contained 
olive oil. 
When Mr. Pinchas noticed his guest's interest in the odd artifact, he told him the 
following story. 
"My father was a respected businessman, but he was always busy and left me in 
my grandfather's care. Every morning my grandfather would wake me, make 
sure I washed my hands, said the morning blessings and didn't forget my lunch. 
Then just before I left for school, he would give me a kiss on my forehead, raise 
his hands and say, 'Va'ani ana ani ba' ['And I, where will I go?' (Gen. 37:30)]. Later, 
I learned that this is what Reuven cried out when he discovered that Joseph was 
no longer in the pit and it was impossible to save him. But I had no idea why my 
grandfather always said that. 
"Then, when I was 14 years old, tragedy struck: my grandfather passed away. I 
began to accompany my father to work. My father tried to make sure that I 
prayed and studied Torah but he was always very busy. I was so fascinated by his 
business that I didn't pay much attention to my studies. 
"Two years later, my father died suddenly. Besides the fact that I was now alone, I 
had to decide what to do with the business. I was given the choice of selling it, or 
trying my luck as a manager. Against the advice of lawyers, I chose the latter. 
"Well, I took to it like a fish to water. It wasn't long before I was quite successful. 
But I began to feel out of place as an observant Jew. I felt that keeping Shabbat 
and eating kosher prevented me from expanding my business. Slowly but surely I 
became less observant, and I discovered that the more commandments I 
dropped, the more successful I became. 
"Several years passed. One day I was walking in the street when I noticed a 
Jewish boy, maybe 13 years old, sitting on the sidewalk crying. I asked him what 
was wrong. 'Oh thank you, sir,' he said 'but this is something only Jews would 
understand.' 
"His words stabbed me in the heart. 'I am also Jewish...' I stammered. 
"'Oh, I'm sorry,' he answered, 'I didn't mean to offend you. It's just that I'm very 
sad about my home situation. We are very poor...' The boy looked up at me and 
30 
wiped his eyes with his shirtsleeve. 'My father died a while ago and my mother 
works hard to support my six brothers and sisters. Well, this morning my mother 
told us that tonight is Chanukah. We prayed for a miracle, that we might find 
some money with which to buy oil. We were so happy when my sister found a 
coin behind a drawer! I ran right to the store and bought a small bottle of oil. I 
was walking home, holding the bottle and dreaming about Chanukah. I was even 
imagining that Moshiach might come now, and my mother will start to smile 
again. Unfortunately, I wasn't looking where I was going, and I tripped. I watched 
in horror as the bottle flew from my hands and landed on a stone. It broke, and all 
the oil spilled out. 'Va'ani ana ani ba!' With these words, the boy began to wail. 
"At that, I suddenly realized what my grandfather had meant. He must have 
known that this would happen. That broken bottle is me! And the spilled oil is my 
Jewish soul - I've lost my Jewish soul! 
"As if in a trance, I withdrew some money from my pocket and handed it to the 
boy. 'Go back to the store,' I told him. 'Buy what you want, and have a happy 
Chanukah! Go!' 
"When the boy was gone, I carefully picked up the bottle and carried it home, still 
in shock. I sent the servants away and when I was alone, I just stood there, 
looking at it and weeping. Then the thought struck me, 'A Jew can't lose his 
Jewish soul.' Maybe I had ignored it for a while, but I'm sure it's still there. I took 
my grandfather's menorah out of the cabinet, dusted it off, found some oil and a 
wick and lit the first Chanukah candle. 
"Its light made me feel alive again. I even decided that the next morning I would 
begin putting on tefilin. The following night I lit two candles and decided that 
from now on I would eat only kosher. The third night, I decided to begin learning 
Torah. The night after that I made the decision to keep Shabbat. By the end of 
Chanukah I had become a new man. A renewed man. The Chanukah lights had 
saved me. 
"So that is the reason I keep that broken bottle: to remind me how the miracle of 
the oil saved my life." 
Reprinted from the Ohr Tmimim Newsletter, www.ohrtmimim.org 
31 


The Chanukah Baby 
It was the custom of Rabbi Yitzchak Meir (the Gerer Rebbe, known as the 
Chidushei HaRim for his famous work by that name) to distribute Chanukah gelt 
to all of his grandchildren every year. This year was no exception and he 
summoned his grandchildren to his study where he gave each a sum of money. 
When they had all received their gifts, the Chidushei HaRim told his grandson 
Shimon Chaim to call his older brother who had not yet come in to receive his 
Chanukah gelt. His brother, Yehuda Arye Leib (who later became Rebbe), came 
at once and stood before his grandfather. 
"What would you like me to give you for Chanukah gelt?" the Chidushei HaRim 
asked the young man. 
"What need do I have for money?" he replied. 
"Ah, but what you and your wife do need is a child! Your 'Chanukah gelt' shall be 
that you and your wife will be the parents of a healthy son this year." 
Yehuda Leib and his wife had been married for several years and as yet had no 
children. The Chidushei HaRim perceived the cause of their childlessness in the 
spiritual realms and he set about making the spiritual corrections which only a 
tzadik can make. The Chidushei HaRim's blessing soon materialized and Yehuda 
Leib's wife became pregnant. Her pregnancy, however, progressed with great 
difficulty. In fact, she became so weak that the doctors who were consulted 
urged that surgery be performed to abort the fetus. 
When word of the doctors' prognosis reached the Chidushei HaRim, he was very 
upset. Why had they consulted doctors, he asked, when he had assured them 
that they would be the parents of a healthy child. "I have promised them a son, 
and G-d willing, they will have a son. Has all my work been in vain!?" And he left 
orders that they go to no more doctors for the doctors could not help them. 
Finally the time came and the young woman went into labor. But the hours of 
labor stretched into days. The midwife insisted that a doctor be called so that 
both the mother and child not be lost, G-d forbid. The Chidushei HaRim 
32 
continued to insist that the young woman would be fine and give birth to a 
healthy son. 
By the third day, the midwife had given up hope and was begging that doctors be 
brought in. The Chidushei HaRim's wife and the mother of the girl ran to the 
Chidushei HaRim's study weeping and wringing their hands. But the Chidushei 
HaRim only nodded and replied that he would refuse to begin his morning 
prayers until the seeming danger had passed and a healthy child was born. A 
short time later one of his granddaughters ran to him with the good news, "Mazal 
Tov, Grandfather! She had given birth to a healthy girl!" 
He replied, "No, that is not true!" 
And it was not true. Soon, someone else entered the room with the information 
that a mistake had been made and it was a healthy boy. With this news, the 
Rebbe pronounced a hearty, "Mazal Tov!" and began his morning prayers. 
As soon as he finished praying, Reb Yitzchak Meir penned a letter to Reb Yudel, 
the father of the new mother. "With the help of G-d, your daughter just now gave 
birth to a boy -- Mazal Tov! -- after several great miracles and acts great kindness 
by the Almighty, Blessed be He, Who is good, and Who does good." 
The circumcision was celebrated in a grand manner and was graced with many 
guests who delivered stirring and insightful words of Torah. The child was named 
Avraham Mordechai Alter. He grew up to be a foremost Talmudic scholar whose 
diligence, alacrity, and purity of speech were legendary. Upon the passing of his 
father, he became the Gerer Rebbe. He was a gifted organizer who left his stamp 
on the influential community of Gerer Chasidim, first in Poland, where his 
followers were numbered in the hundreds of thousands, then in the Holy Land, 
where he settled in 1940. He was active in establishing schools and youth 
organizations, as well as in rescue and rehabilitation work during and after the 
Holocaust. He passed away in 1948 and was buried in Jerusalem. 
33 


Chanukah  Delight 
Rabbi Tzvi Elimelech of Dinov was on his way to visit his Rebbe, the 
Chozeh (Seer) of Lublin. During the journey he began to wonder from which of 
the Twelve Tribes he descended. 
"Why is it," he thought to himself, "that as soon as Chanukah nears, I always 
experience a special spiritual delight? I cannot be descended from the 
Hasmoneans, for I am not of the priestly family. So where does this special 
feeling come from?" 
Rabbi Tzvi Elimelech decided that when he was in Lublin, he would ask his 
Rebbe. Upon arriving at the Chozeh's court, before he even managed to say a 
word, the Chozeh said: "You are descended from the Tribe of Yissachar. As to 
why you experience what you do on Chanukah, it is because in the time of the 
Holy Temple you were a member of the Rabbinical Court of the Hasmoneans" for 
the Tribe of Yissachar traditionally supplied the scholars who manned the 
Rabbinal Court in Temple times. 
That is why Reb Tzvi Elemelech entitled his learned book on the festivals, Bnei 
Yissachar - the Sons of Yissachar. 


Menorah  Jealousy  ( 2 )  
For the Chasidim of Rabbi Mordechai of Chernobyl, Chanukah was a 
special time. Regardless of the distance, thousands would come from all over the 
country for the privilege of watching the Rebbe kindle the menorah. 
One year, on the eve of the first night of Chanukah, the Rebbe's shamash 
announced that there would be a small deviation from tradition. Instead of 
34 
kindling the Chanukah lights in the menorah he had inherited from his saintly 
father, Rabbi Nachum, the Rebbe would be using a different one. He offered no 
reason. "All I know is that the Rebbe told me to take it out of storage and get it 
ready," the shamash said. "I don't know where it is from, only that it is 
exceptionally beautiful." 
That evening, when the sun went down, Rabbi Mordechai strode into the huge 
synagogue to fulfill the mitzvah. Everyone was already waiting in eager 
anticipation. Thousands of eyes followed the tzadik's every movement. 
Indeed, the menorah that had been set up was not the Rebbe's usual 
candelabrum. And although the shamash had described it as "exceptionally 
beautiful," this was truly an understatement. The Rebbe recited the blessing and 
lit the wick, then stared into the tiny flame for a long time. It was obvious that the 
Rebbe's thoughts were far away, even though he was physically present. 
A few minutes later the Rebbe shook his head slightly, as if returning to the world 
around him. Then, without even looking up, he started speaking: 
"Many years ago I visited the village of Cherbin," the Rebbe began. "The 
Chasidim there greeted me very warmly, and I was invited to stay in the home of 
a certain Reb Meir. This Reb Meir, who had once been a follower of my late 
father, was the wealthiest man in town. He was a true Chasid in all of his 248 
limbs and 365 sinews. His love for the Torah and his desire to perform mitzvot in 
the most beautiful manner possible knew no bounds. 
"Towards the end of my stay in Cherbin Reb Meir led me into his treasury to show 
me his riches. There, in one corner of the room, was the most extraordinary silver 
menorah I had ever seen. Reb Meir told me that he had paid a fortune for it, and 
planned on using it the very next Chanukah. I picked it up to admire its 
workmanship and artistry. 
"'Reb Meir,' I said to him suddenly, looking him in the eye. 'Would you give me 
this menorah as a gift?' My question momentarily startled him, and he was silent 
for a minute. But after considering my request he immediately agreed. 'Yes,' he 
said. 'I would give all my wealth to the Rebbe.' 
"When I got back to Chernobyl I instructed my family to put the menorah in 
storage. When Chanukah arrived I did not ask for it, but continued to use the 
35 
menorah I had inherited from my father. My family was somewhat surprised by 
this, for why had I brought the other one if I wasn't planning on using it? But as 
time passed, everyone forgot that the other one even existed. 
"This year, however, I decided to change my custom, and now I will tell you why: 
"A few days ago, Reb Meir of Cherbin passed away. When he ascended to the 
heavenly court, it seemed obvious that his rightful place was in Gan Eden [the 
Garden of Eden]. Thousands of angels testified to all the good deeds Reb Meir 
had performed throughout his life. One after the other they described his love of 
Torah and his exceptional performance of mitzvot. 
"Reb Meir was about to pass through the gates of Gan Eden when all of a sudden, 
an angel without any eyes stood up and cried out, 'I object!' Pandemonium broke 
out. The blind angel was given permission to speak, and proceeded to tell the 
story of the silver menorah Reb Meir had once purchased at great expense. 
"'What you don't know,' the angel explained, 'was that this menorah was bought 
from a poor Jew in Cherbin who was forced to sell it because his wife and children 
were starving. This menorah had been in his family for 13 generations, and was 
almost as dear to him as his life. For years he refused to sell it. Reb Meir was well 
aware of the poor man's circumstances. The otherwise generous and charitable 
Reb Meir had such an intense desire to own the beautiful menorah that he 
deliberately exploited the poor man and offered financial assistance only through 
the purchase of the menorah.' 
"The heavenly court decided to review the case. In the end it was ruled that Reb 
Meir should go to Gan Eden, but not directly. To atone for the anguish he had 
caused, he would first have to wander around through the celestial spheres 
accompanied by the blind angel. 
"Many years ago, when I visited Reb Meir's house and he showed me the 
menorah, I knew what was going to happen. I took it from him so that when the 
proper time came, I would be able to help him make amends. Tonight, when I lit 
the first candle of Chanukah in that menorah, it corrected Reb Meir's spiritual 
defect and allowed him to enter Gan Eden. It also restored the gift of sight to the 
blind angel... 
36 


The Fifth Night Of  
Chanukah Story 
As told by Rabbi Moshe-Chaim Greenwald to the editor of Kfar Chabad 
Magazine 
Although I am not a Lubavitcher, I feel it is important for people to share 
their personal stories about the Rebbe, so that we and our children can know 
more about the great spiritual presence that lived among us. We always kept this 
story within the family, but now, after the passing of our holy Leader, I feel 
obligated to make it public. May the merit of our belief in tzaddikim bring us 
closer to the Redemption that the Rebbe worked his whole life to bring.  
My father, Rabbi Abraham-Tzvi Greenwald, was born in Lodz. Poland. His father 
died when he was only eight years old, leaving his mother alone with seven 
young orphans. She sent my father to live with her cousin, Rabbi Menachem 
Zemba, a famous Talmudic scholar in pre-war Warsaw. Rabbi Zemba raised him 
devotedly, took responsibility for his education, and even studied with him 
personally.  
On the fourteenth of Kislev, 5689 [1928], Rabbi Menachem-Mendel Schneerson 
married Rebbetzin Chaya-Mushka, the daughter of the sixth Lubavitcher Rebbe, 
Rabbi Yosef-Yitzchak Schneersohn. The "great wedding" in Warsaw was 
attended by the Chasidic masters and great leaders of Polish Jewry, including 
Rabbi Zemba.  
Rabbi Zemba was quite taken by the Lubavitcher Rebbe's new son-in-law, and 
wanted to meet with him personally. He arranged to visit the Rebbe at his hotel, 
taking along my father, who was then 17.  
The two scholars had a lively discussion on many issues throughout the Talmud. 
Rabbi Zemba was very impressed and spoke about their encounter for many 
years afterwards.  
37 
When Rabbi Zemba was ready to leave, the Rebbe suddenly turned to my father 
and said: "There are only a few days left until Chanukah. Do you know why it is 
customary in Chassidic shuls to celebrate and make special parties on the fifth 
night of Chanukah?"  
My father was not aware of this custom or its reason, nor was Rabbi Zemba, who 
looked intently at the Rebbe, waiting for his answer. The Rebbe continued, still 
addressing my father: "It happens that the fifth day of Chanukah can never occur 
on a Shabbat. This represents great darkness [such that even the great holiness 
of Shabbat cannot penetrate]. The fifth candle symbolizes that the light of 
Chanukah can illuminate even such intense darkness. This is the duty of every 
Jew, wherever he may find himself, be it in Warsaw or in London, to illuminate 
even the greatest darkness."  
* * * 
Years passed. The tragedy of the Holocaust hit Polish Jewry. My father went 
through its horrors, first in the ghetto and then in the death camps. His first wife 
and five children were killed in front of his eyes. At the end of the war, he was still 
alive, thank G-d, but broken in body and spirit.  
For two years he circulated among the DP camps looking for surviving family 
members. Alas, all his sisters, brothers and family had been murdered. In 1948 he 
emigrated to America, settling in Philadelphia, where his uncle, Moshe-Chaim 
Greenwald, lived. His uncle, an Amshinover chassid who had moved there before 
World War I, welcomed him with open arms and tried to rehabilitate him and 
help him start a new life after his terrible holocaust trauma.  
His uncle and the Amshinover Rebbe pressured my father to meet my mother, 
who also lived through the war. My mother, a daughter of Reb Zushe Zinkovitz of 
Cracow, a chassid of the Rebbe of Alexander, had managed to escape with her 
sister at the beginning of the war, wandering from country to country until they 
came to Canada. They were raised by their great-uncle, Reb Koppel Schwartz, a 
prestigious Jew in Toronto.  
My father needed encouragement and confidence for his second marriage, so 
Reb Koppel traveled with him to New York to receive the previous Lubavitcher 
Rebbe's blessing. Reb Koppel told the Rebbe that my father was a holocaust 
38 
survivor who lost his whole family. The Rebbe's eyes began to tear. He then 
blessed my father to build a family and live a long life.  
Before leaving, my father mentioned that he had attended the Rebbe's 
daughter's wedding in Warsaw. The Rebbe's eyes lit up, and he said: "Since you 
were at my son-in-law's wedding, it would be proper to stop in and visit him, 
too."  
Reb Koppel and my father went downstairs to the Rebbe's office. To my father's 
great surprise, the Rebbe instantly recognized him from his visit almost twenty 
years before. The Rebbe asked him about Rabbi Zemba's last days. He heard that 
he had been killed in the Warsaw Ghetto uprising, but did not know the details.  
After my father related all that he knew, the Rebbe said: "Since my father-in-law, 
the Rebbe, told you to come visit me, I must tell you a Torah concept. We are 
now in the month of Kislev, close to Chanukah. It happens that the fifth day of 
Chanukah can never occur on a Shabbos. This represents a great darkness. The 
fifth candle thus symbolizes the great light of Chanukah, which can illuminate 
even such an intense darkness. That is why the joy on this night is so immense. It 
is the duty of every Jew, wherever he may find himself, be it in New York or 
London, to illuminate even the greatest darkness."  
My father was stunned. The exact same insight came back to him, word for word, 
as the Rebbe had told it to him 20 years before in the Warsaw hotel. 
* * * 
After getting married, my father served as a teacher and rabbi for the Adath 
Israel congregation in Washington Heights, New York. My sister and I were born 
there. When I was five years old, we moved to Toronto where Reb Koppel had 
found him a position in a Satmar Yeshiva. My younger brother was born there. 
Although my father's attitudes became close to those of Satmar and he sent us 
to study in schools and yeshivas close to their approach, he still respected the 
Rebbe and always spoke of him to us with the highest regard.  
Before my marriage in 1968, my father said that although we were not Lubavitch 
chassidim, he wanted me to receive the Lubavicher Rebbe's blessing before my 
wedding, just as he had done before his. It was not easy to schedule an 
39 
appointment with the Rebbe without waiting for months because of his busy 
schedule. My father pleaded with the Rebbe's secretariat to allow me in for a 
blessing, until finally it was agreed to let us in before the wedding, but only for a 
blessing - no other discussion.  
On the designated day, we flew in from Toronto. My father was excited at the 
prospect of seeing the Rebbe again. There were many people waiting for their 
turn with the Rebbe that evening, and by the time we entered the Rebbe's room, 
it was early morning. It was the first time I saw the Rebbe and he made a big 
impression on me. My father gave the Rebbe a note with my name and my 
bride's, requesting that we merit to build a Jewish family.  
Before even looking at the note, the Rebbe looked up at my father and smiled. 
He said, "It is now more than 20 years since you came here. It's high time, 
especially since my father-in-law sent you to me."  
My father stood shocked, unable to answer. Meanwhile, the secretary was 
knocking on the door that we should hurry, but the Rebbe motioned with his 
hand to dismiss the interruption. Opening the letter, he gave us his blessings to 
build a home, and he also blessed my father with a long, good life. The Rebbe 
said to my father: "Just as you attended my wedding, so may G-d give you 
strength to attend your grandchild's wedding."  
My father was very moved by this blessing.  
Before going out, my father requested to ask the Rebbe a question. "We told the 
secretary that we would come in just for a blessing, but I would nevertheless like 
to ask an important question that has been bothering me, should the Rebbe 
permit me do so."  
The Rebbe smiled and said, "Since the Rebbe sent you to me, I must answer all 
the questions."  
At that point the secretary began knocking on the door again to interrupt, and 
again the Rebbe motioned us to ignore it.  
My father continued: "Living in a Satmar community, I often hear complaints and 
40 
criticism about Lubavitch. How can you associate with people who are secular, 
irreligious and against the Torah. How can you put tefillin on with people who are 
not observant. The verse in Psalms states, 'Whoever hates You, O G-d, I will 
hate." My father apologized profusely, saying he didn't mean to criticize, but only 
to understand himself and in order to be able to explain to others.  
The Rebbe answered: "Suppose the daughter of one of your zealous neighbors 
were to abandon Judaism, G-d forbid. What would he do? Would he try to bring 
her back to Torah and mitzvot or would he say: "Whoever hates G-d, I will hate," 
sever relations, and never want to see her again?"  
The Rebbe continued: "Of course he would say his own daughter is different, as it 
says, 'do not remain oblivious to the plight of your relatives'. The Rebbe's 
expression became serious, he banged on the table and said: "In G-d's eyes, every 
Jew is as dear and precious as an only child. To my father-in-law, every Jew is a 
relative who cannot be ignored."  
The Rebbe then looked at me and my father penetratingly and said: "We will 
conclude with a blessing. It is known that all chassidim celebrate the 5th night of 
Chanukah. The reason is because the fifth day of Chanukah can never occur on a 
Shabbos. This represents a great darkness. The fifth candle thus symbolizes the 
great light of Chanukah, which can illuminate even such an intense darkness. This 
is the duty of every Jew, wherever he may find himself, be it in Toronto or in 
London. Every Jew is a part of G-d above, His only child. When you illuminate his 
soul, then even the farthest Jew, in the darkest place, can be awakened."  
My father was so taken aback and shocked to hear these words again that he 
didn't hear the rest of the blessing of the Rebbe. He didn't even remember 
leaving the Rebbe's room. All the way back to Toronto he kept muttering to 
himself: "Amazing; most amazing." 
*** 
Ten years passed. In 1978 my younger brother got engaged to a girl from London. 
Just minutes before leaving our house to fly there for the wedding, our neighbor, 
a highly respected member of the Satmar community, came in and asked to 
speak privately with my father. He confided to him that his daughter had 
41 
forsaken Judaism and burst into tears. He and his wife didn't know much about it 
in the beginning, as she hid it from them. But two weeks ago, to their great 
embarrassment and dismay, she ran off with a non-Jewish boyfriend and fled to 
London. All their efforts to locate her were unsuccessful. He asked my father, 
since he was going to London, to try to find his daughter and save her. My father 
who was a close friend of this neighbor was terribly shaken by this story. I was 
also distraught and began thinking about what we could possibly do about this 
situation in London.  
My brother's wedding was a joyful celebration. On the first night of sheva 
brachot, the week of festive meals, my father told his new relative the story, and 
asked his advice. The bride's father told my father that he himself had no idea 
what to do, but he recommended a Lubavitch friend, Rabbi Avrohom-Yitzchok 
Gluck, who had accomplished many missions for the Lubavitcher Rebbe and had 
helped many lost souls throughout Europe find their way back.  
They immediately called him. Rabbi Gluck promised to do all he could. He called 
the girl's parents in Toronto for any particles of information and clues on how to 
locate the girl.  
My parents remained in London for twelve days. One day during Chanukah, 
Rabbi Gluck called. "Come quickly. I have a nice surprise for you."  
My father hurried to Rabbi Gluck's house. When he came in, he saw a girl sitting 
in the living room crying profusely. Rabbi Gluck had located the girl, and she 
wanted to return with them to Toronto.  
As my father looked around the room, his eyes fell on the kindled Menorah. It 
had five burning candles. He felt faint as he recalled the Rebbe's words to him 
from 50 years ago, and from 30 years ago and from 10 years ago:  
"The fifth candle symbolizes the strength of the menorah light...the role of every 
Jew is to light up the darkest place, in Warsaw or London, ...in New York or 
London, ...in Toronto or London.... If his daughter were to stray from Judaism, 
...for G-d, every Jew is an only child, ...for my father-in-law every Jew is a relative 
who cannot be ignored."  
42 
The girl returned to her family and to Judaism. Needless to say, from that day on 
this "zealous neighbor" stopped speaking against Lubavitch.  
When my father returned to Canada he felt a strong desire to see the Rebbe 
again. But by this time it was even more difficult to get a private audience with 
the Rebbe. It wasn't until the following Tishrei, in 1980, my father succeeded in 
joining a group "audience" with the Rebbe, along with all the guests who had 
come to the Rebbe for the holidays.  
When his turn came to pass by the Rebbe, he could not speak and bust out crying 
from great emotion. Finally he briefly told him the story. The Rebbe commented: 
"My father-in-law had great foresight."  
Every time my father retold this story, he would marvel over the wondrous 
miracle of the Rebbe. Fifty years ago when he was a bridegroom, the Rebbe saw 
what would happen 50 years later. But even more, he could not get over the 
modesty of the Rebbe, who attributed everything to his father-in-law's foresight.  
The chain of miracles did not end there.  
My father passed away on the 14th day of Kislev 1988, following the celebration 
week of my eldest daughter's marriage. Thus was fulfilled the Rebbe's blessing: 
that he would rejoice at the wedding of his grandchild. It was exactly 60 years to 
the day since the Rebbe's wedding in Warsaw.  
** 

ד"סב 
 
THE LOOK OF A YID 
Part 1 
Yarmulka (Kippah), Tzitzis,  
Order of Getting Dresssed 
____________________________ םש 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    1 
 ד"סב 
 
 
 
 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    2 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
    Yarmulka/Kippah  ..................................................... 1 
     Tzitzis  ...................................................................... 12 
     Order of Getting Dressed ......................................... 60 
     Put on Your Shoes Right ........................................... 63 
  
ד"סב 
THE LOOK OF A JEW 
INTRODUCTION 
When we think of Neil Armstrong’s initial steps on the moon, 
we envision a big puffy space suit descending onto the moon’s surface. 
No one would think that the actual space suit is Neil Armstrong 
for all realize that it is just a garment 
to enable him to exist in outer space. 
In the world around us, much emphasis is placed  
on the beauty and strength of our physical body.  
We have many mitzvohs and halachos related to our body & clothing  
to remind us that 
the real me, and my purpose on this world is my   
and not the ‘spacesuit’ of my body, which is just there  
to enable my   
 ה 
מ
ש 
נ  
מ
ה , 
to exist in the atmosphere of this world. 
ש 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    1 
נ  


 ד"סב 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    2 
 ש  אר י  וסי   כ 
aka yarmulka / kippah 
 
The Rabbonon established that men should wear a head covering 
throughout the day. * 
Common practice is to wear what is known as a ‘yarmulka’ or ‘kippah’. 
 
Where does the name “yarmulka” come from? 
 
The   מ  פ  ר   שםי explain that the purpose of a yarmulka is to bring about 
   י  ר  א   ש ת  מ  ים , awe of Hashem (see upcoming LuLLAY’s).  
 
Some say the word “yarmulka” is actually a contraction from either: 
   קֹולֶאֵמ אֵר י - awe/awareness** of G-d 
or  
א  כ ל מ אֵר י - (awe/awareness of the King). 
 
 
 
* In situations where one does not need to wear a yarmulka (ex. swimming)  
a man’s head must still be covered when saying Hashem’s Name. 
 
** Rav Avigdor Miller zt”l would translate   י  ר  א   ש ת  מ  ים as ‘awareness of Hashem’  
from the root word האר. 
 
ד"סב 
ש  אר י  וסי   כ 
aka yarmulka / kippah 
Where does the name “kippah” come from? 
The name ‘kippah’ means 'dome" due to its shape. 
The  
).אי הליגמ( 
ארמג
tells us that 3 people ruled over the whole world.  
The expression the ארמג uses is “הפיכב וכלמ”  
which Rashi explains as "עיקרה תפיכ לכ תחת" – “under the arch of the heavens”.  
As by  תלכת of תיציצ the power of association brings us to think of the דובכה אסכ,  
perhaps the name “kippah” also alludes to the 
עיקרה
,  
reminding us of Hashem, Who rules over the entire arch of the heavens,  
thereby instilling within us םימש תארי, the purpose of the “kippah”.  
תפיכ
(Rav Netanel Bitton) 
It is interesting to note the word    
פי
כ  
ה is from the same   
ש as    כ ף ,  
spoon and palm, as they both have a rounded shape. 
These words are sourced from the letter   כ'
ר 
ו 
ש 
'ף ( כ ) 
whose actual shape resembles a spoon and a dome,  
depending on how you rotate it. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    3 
 ד"סב 
 
 
 
 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    4 
  ש  אר י  וסי   כ 
 
A head covering brings yiras shomayim 
 
The mother of Rabi Nachman bar Yitzchok was told by the astronomers  
that her son will become a robber.   
To avoid this, they told her to ensure his head was always covered. 
She relayed their message and told him to daven, but didn’t tell him why.* 
 
One day, he was sitting under someone’s date tree and his head covering 
fell off. He looked up, saw the dates, and his yetzer strengthened.  
As his head covering was off, his extra yiras shomayim also fell away.  
He jumped up and grabbed the dates with his teeth,  
reverting back to the “robber” within him. 
 
Yarmulka = yorai me’Elokah! 
 
 
 
* (Gemara Shabbos 144b.) 
  אל"    ש  ב  ק   ת  ג הי  ול  י  ר י   שי "הי . – “do not leave him with his head uncovered”.  
Being a good Jewish mother, she told him 
 “   כ  ס  ר י   שי   כ ךי  ה י  כי  ד י   ת  ה  ו  ע י  ל  א ך  מי  ת  ד א   ש  מ  י  ו א  ב  ע  ר י  ח  מי ” –  
“cover your head so you will have Yiras Shomamyim and daven”.  
We see from this that a yarmulka is not a magic potion, rather davening is also needed.  
(Perhaps not explaining to him why he needed to do this led to the next part.) 
ד"סב 
ש  אר י  וסי   כ 
There is “Something” above you. 
The Gemara (Kedushin 31a) says that Rav Huna was very careful  
not to walk 4 amos with his head uncovered 
“  
“He said: “The    
י
ש
ה
ני
אר  
כ 
ש 
מ ה ֹ
ל ֵ
ע 
מ 
ל ה 
ני 
כ 
ש :ר 
מ  
א 
”, 
, Hashem’s presence, is above my head”. 
Our yarmulka is not worn on our palms, our knees, etc., 
rather it is worn specifically on our head, on the top of our bodies, 
to remind us at all times that there is something above us, 
physically – our yarmulka, and realistically – Hakadosh Boruch Hu. 
Yarmulka = yorai me’Elokah! 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    5 
ד"סב 
ש  אר י  וסי   כ 
Keep your lid on  
and don’t let your thoughts ‘bubble away’. 
At the top of our head is our brain,  
the source of our thoughts, emotions, and actions.  
Uncovered, without any   
ה
ע
נ 
כ 
ה 
, subjugation,  
our mind can just bubble and bubble and lead to all types of ideas.  
When we cover our head, it is a reminder for us to “keep our lid on”  
and to keep our thoughts under control for 
 
וד
וב ֹ
כ ץ ֹ
ר  
אֶ
ה ל 
  כ 
אל
מ ֹ
, the whole world is filled with Hashem’s presence. 
A parallel can be made to the way one makes a non-kosher metal sink kosher.  
One of the ways is to use boiling water, which is still bubbling. 
If one uses an electric kettle, it automatically shuts off, so how do you work around this? 
To avoid this problem, if the lid is left open, the water will keep on bubbling.  
Be careful though, that you don’t let all the water bubble away. 
So too, a yarmulka puts our ‘lid’ on to help us remember to not let our thoughts bubble away.  
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    6 
ד"סב 
Yarmulka / Kippah 
1 תוכלה 
1) One may not walk even 4 amos (around 6 feet) with his head uncovered.  
This applies even when playing sports.  
(When swimming, showering, getting a haircut, or similar activities, one 
may be without his head uncovered). 
('ו 'ב ח"וא) 
2) In situations where one does not need to wear a yarmulka (ex: swimming)  
a man’s head must still be covered when saying Hashem’s Name. 
3) Even when going to sleep, we should keep our yarmulka on,  
even though it will probably fall off when we are sleeping. 
Did you know: Some people sleep with a special yarmulka that stays on! 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    7 
ד"סב 
Yarmulka / Kippah 
2 תוכלה 
4) If one’s yarmulka falls off:  
Indoors: the head is considered covered even if one puts his own hand on 
his head. 
Outdoors: his own hand would not count as covered, however a sleeve, 
other material, or someone else’s hand, would. 
To make a brocho, or say Hashem’s Name,  
one’s head would need to be covered as like outdoors. 
5) How big does a yarmulka need to be? 
Rav Moshe Feinstein zt”l said: 
it should be big enough to be considered a ‘covering’. 
Rav Ovadia Yosef zt”l said: 
it needs to be visible from all sides. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    8 
ד"סב 
Yarmulka / Kippah 
Why don’t women wear a yarmulka? 
According to Kabbalah,  
women are more in tune with kedusha and yiras shomayim.  
Therefore, they don’t need a yarmulka to remind them  
of their built-in connection with Hashem.  
Men, who are more physical, need more actions than women  
(yarmulka, tzitzis, tefillin, minyan etc.)  
to strengthen their spiritual side. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    9 
ד"סב 
Yarmulka / Kippah 
Yarmulka in the Gulag 
The famous Russian refusenik, Rabbi Yosef Mendelevich, fought fiercely for the 
freedom to practice Yiddishkeit as he knew. He even tried to hijack a plane and 
take it to Eretz Yisroel. He was caught and thrown into prison by the KGB.  
The prison guards did everything they could to break his spirit. To offset their 
abuse, he would go on extended hunger strikes, showing them that his 
commitment was greater than theirs; he was willing to fight for his freedom, 
more than they were willing to fight to take it away from him. 
While in prison, as he was becoming more connected to Yiddishkeit , he decided to 
wear a yarmulka. But where in a Russian jail is he going to get a yarmulka.  
He decided to take a handkerchief, fold it, and wear it as his yarmulka.  
Although it was a constant battle, he managed to wear his ‘kippah’ all the time. 
One day, his father came to visit him.  
This was a rare occurrence, as his father was not well, and it was difficult for him 
to make the long journey to the prison. The guards decided to test Yosef: 
Before he would be allowed to leave the cell and greet his father,  
he would have to remove his head covering. 
Yosef was faced with a dreadful dilemma. He knew that if he gives in now,  
then they will have broken his spirit — and defeated him.  
And so, he refused to take his kippah off.  
The prison authorities would not budge either. In this epic battle of wills,  
the heartless guards did not give in and refused to allow him to see his father. 
Instead of going through the door and running into his father’s arms, 
Yosef remained strong, did not bend, and kept his kippah firmly on his head! 
(Tragically, he would never see his father again; for his father died a short while later.) 
(Adapted from ‘A Touch of Chizuk’, pg 45, Rabbi Yechiel Spero, Artscroll) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    10 
ד"סב 
Yarmulka / Kippah 
Saved by a yarmulka 
Rabbi Jonathan Sacks and his wife on a trip to the Catskill Mountains in 
New York, were told the following story by their driver: 
One Friday afternoon, he was making his way to join his family in the 
Catskills for Shabbos when he saw a man wearing a yarmulke, bending 
over his car at the side of the road. One of the tires was flat, and he was 
about to change the wheel. 
Our driver told us that he pulled over to the roadside, went over to the 
man, helped him change the wheel, and wished him “Good Shabbos.”  
The man thanked him, took his yarmulke off and put it in his pocket.  
Our driver must have given him a quizzical look, because the man turned 
and explained: “Oh, I’m not Jewish. It’s just that I know that if I’m wearing 
one of these” – he gestured to the yarmulke – “someone Jewish will stop 
and come to help me.” 
(RabbiSacks.org Ki Teitse 5778) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    11 
ד"סב 
תי צי צ 
Understand the meaning of תיציצ and all that which we do. 
A poor man once came across a childhood friend who became very wealthy. His 
friend invited him home so they could catch up on the ‘good old times’. As they 
were sitting, the poor man noticed that whenever his friend wanted something to 
eat, he would ring a bell and butler would come in laden with delicious food and 
drink. The poor man was ecstatic, for he realized that he has now discovered the 
secret to rid himself of the hunger in his home. 
On the way home, he stopped by a store and bought himself an expensive bell – 
the more expensive the bell, the more riches will come his way. When he arrived 
home, he gathered his family together to show them his new prize possession, the 
key to their success. However, no matter how hard he tried, the bell ringing just 
produced …. a bell tone – no butler, no fruits, no delicacies, nothing. 
“I don’t understand, my bell is better than my friends’. How come it doesn’t work?”. 
His wise wife turned to him and explained – “The bell is great, but for it to work, 
you must first do the preparation before it. No preparation = no results.” 
The Dubno Maggid explained: 
yes, תיציצ comes with a guarantee of 'ה תווצמ לכ תא םתרכזו ותוא םתיארו, 
but to remember the תֹוו צ מ through the תי צי צ,  
you must first understand how great the  הוצמ of תי צי צ is  
and what it represents. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    12 


ד"סב 
תי צי צ 
Tzitzis and the wood gatherer 
In חלש תשרפ, the story of the םיצע ששוקמ, the wood gatherer on תבש, 
is followed by the השרפ of תיציצ.  
What is the connection? 
The םינקז תעד explains:  
Upon defending the wood carriers תבש לוליח, 
ונבר השמ said to Hashem that during the week we wear ןיליפת  
which reminds us of the תווצמ,  
but on תבש, when we don’t wear ןיליפת,  
what is meant to remind us of the תווצמ? 
Hashem answered  
“I will give them the special הוצמ of תיציצ which applies throughout every day,  
through which 
יתוצמ 
לכ
 תא םתרכזו– you will remember all of My  תווצמ.” 
Hence, תיציצ is written right next to the story of the םיצע ששוקמ. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    13 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
What does the word  תיציצ mean? 
1) From the word ץי צ ה ל – to look, 
As the קוספ in םירישה ריש states: 
םי  כ רֲח ה ן מ ץי צֵמ ת ונ  לֲח ה ן מ  חי  ג  ש מ  ונ ל ת  כ ר ח א ד מ וע ה ז ה  נ ה. 
for the תי צי צ are for looking at and reminding us of ה
' 
י
"
( שר
) 
and His תווצמ.  
Perhaps the word תי צי צ is plural,  
for when we look at our תי צי צ and think about ה
' ,  
' 
ה
looks back at us and ‘thinks’ of us.  
(יפ ינב) 
2) ץיצ means strings, as in the קוספ in )ח קרפ( לאקזחי says 
“ישאר תציצב ינחקיו" and they took me by the strings of my head 
)ייחב וניבר( 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    14 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
Its special protection 1 
Before a soldier goes out to battle,  
he puts on a bulletproof vest to protect himself. 
Each of the תיציצ is made up of 8 strings and 5 double knots. 
Together this equals 13 which signifies  
Hashem’s  הבהא for us, as well as His םימחרה תודמ ג"י. 
The two front תיציצ (13) combined, equals 26 - ה’s name of םימחר. 
These תיציצ are placed, two in front and two in back,  
which in turn, surround us from all sides with ה"בקה’s protection and love. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    15 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
Its special protection 2 
Throughout our day,  
we evoke the  תוכז of the 3 תובא and 4  תוהמא 
(Hinted to in the 3 and 4 armed ש on the שאר לש ןיליפת) 
When we count the letters in the name of the תובא, 
בקעי קחצי םהרבא, we get 13 
When we count the letters in the name of the  תוהמא, 
האל לחר הקבר הרש, we also get 13. 
Each of the תיציצ is made up of 8 strings and 5 double knots. 
Together this equals 13. 
Throughout our day, wherever we go we carry with us  
the תוכז of our םישודקה תוהמאו תובא, 
reminding us as well to emulate them 
and follow in the path that they set for us. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    16 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
Its special protection 3 
Before we venture into the upcoming day,  
we don our תיציצ, whose השודק protects us in the day ahead, 
from the onslaughts of the ערה רצי and that which is around us. 
Two תיציצ in front, and two תיציצ in back,  
protect us as we say in Maariv "ונירחאמו ונינפלמ ןטש רסהו" 
remove the ןטש from before us - before we do the action,  
and behind us – after we do the action. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    17 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
Its tremendous power & reward - 1 
We find by תיציצ ideas that we find by no other  תווצמ: 
'ה תווצמ לכ תא םתרכזו ותוא םתיארו 
&  "יתוצמ לכ תא םתישעו ורכזת ןעמל" 
the power to remind us of all the other תווצמ! 
םכיקולאל םישודק םתייהו 
The power of תיציצ to make us holy! 
It is one of the least expensive ritual תווצמ, yet its spiritual benefits 
can be priceless (Rav Aryeh Kaplan, Tzitzis, Tallith Katan) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    18 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
Its tremendous power & reward – 2 
There are 248 השע תוצמ, ‘to do תווצמ’. 
These correspond to the 248 limbs in the body, with each הוצמ 
giving strength to a different limb. 
But there are certain תווצמ that we can never do –  
some תווצמ are only for םינהכ, some only for םילארשי,  
and many we can’t do nowadays.  
So how do we strengthen those body parts? 
'ה gave us a blanket הוצמ – תיציצ –  
which covers our body and is equal to all the תווצמ,  
thereby giving השודק to our entire body.  
)זעול םעמ( 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    19 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
םֶהי ֵד ג ב יֵפ נ  כ־ל ע – Why on clothing? 1 (Part 1) 
Before ם ד א and ה ו ח ate from the ת ע ד ה ץ ע,  
they were clothed in an ףי ק מ ה ר וא, a special holy light.  
Upon sinning, they immediately they lost their lofty ה ג ר ד מ  
and needed to search for clothing to cover themselves with. 
When they sinned, they moved away from ד ח א 'ה, the ם ל וע ל  ש  ופ ול א, 
that is often represented by the Letter '
'
א
Moving away from '
'
א
. 
, the letters following are ד ,ג ,ב,  
the same letters which spell – ד ג  ב – to rebel, and ד ג  ב – clothing, 
for the necessity for ‘clothing’  
is an outcome of the initial ‘rebellion’ of eating from the ת ע ד ה ץ ע. 
We are therefore given a special הוצמ (see part 2) on our דגב
to rectify and protect from this  
ה
ד
י
גב
םי
, rebellion. 
,  
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    20 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
םֶהי ֵד ג ב יֵפ נ  כ־ל ע – Why on clothing? 1 (Part 2) 
There were two concepts pulling הוח to eat from the תעדה ץע –  
the eyes and the heart/mind. 
אֶר ֵ ת ו
ל כֲא מ ל ץ ע ה ב וט י  כ ה   ש א ה 
לי  כ  ש ה ל ץ ע ה ד מ חֶנ ו ם י ני ֵע ל א וה־ה ו ֲא ת י כ ו 
“And the woman saw that the tree was good for eating  
and it was tempting to the eyes, and desirous for wisdom.” 
תיציצ are specifically placed on םֶכי ֵד ג  ב, our clothing. 
to rectify the original  
ה
ד
י
גב
, rebellion,  
and serve as a visual reminder – 
ותוא 
to tie up our connection with 'ה,  
enabling us to correct and fulfill 
םֶכיֵני ֵע 
י רֲח א ו
םֶכ ב ב ל
םתיארו
י רֲח א  ור ות ת א ל ו
not following after the desires of the heart and eyes. – the cause for the original  א ט ח.  
(יפ ינב) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    21 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
םֶהי ֵד ג ב יֵפ נ  כ־ל ע – Why on clothing? 2 
Clothing differentiates man from animals.  
Wearing תיציצ specifically on our garments,  
reminds us that we have a higher purpose than animals,  
and to make all our choices and actions holy. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    22 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
םֶהי ֵד ג ב יֵפ נ  כ־ל ע – Why on clothing? 3 
Clothing is one of the most physical things we have. 
(‘Clothes makes the man.’) 
'ה told us to take our clothing and to put תיציצ on it, 
to show and remind us  
that we can and should take our physical items  
and use them for coming closer to 'ה. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    23 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
Why 4 Corners? 
The )בי:בכ םירבד( קוספ says 
הָּֽ  ב־ה  ס כ  ת   ר    שֲא    ך ת ו ָּֽס  כ ת ו  פ נ  כ  ע    ב ר א־ל ע   ך    ל־ה  שֲעָּֽ  ת םי   ל ד  ג 
Even if one is wearing a 5 cornered garment,  
תיציצ is only placed on 4 of the corners. 
The תיציצ on the 4 corners remind us: 
• That Hashem is everywhere – all 4 corners of the world. 
• As תיציצ reminds us of the תווצמ, the 4 corners remind us that no 
matter where we are in the world, Hashem’s הרות and תווצמ apply. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    24 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
The Tzitzis don’t forget 
Among the prisoners at the Auschwitz concentration camp was the Vietzener 
rav, Rabbi Tzvi Hirsch Meisels, When the Nazis forced him and his family from 
their home, there was little time to take anything along. One item he made 
sure to take was a precious tallis which he received from his father-in-law. 
The tallis had belonged to the tzaddik Rabbi Moshe Teitelbaum, author of 
Yitav Leiv. Our Sages teach that tzitzis protect a person from evil and Rav 
Meisels was convinced that a tallis which had been worn by a tzaddik would 
provide additional protection in the dangerous times ahead. 
Upon arriving at Auschwitz, the Jews were forced to surrender all their 
possessions. Thus, Rabbi Meisels had no choice but to hand over his precious 
tallis. He was determined, however, to get it back. He learned that all 
confiscated possessions were at one location in the camp. There they were 
sorted; all items of value were sent to Germany for the government and army 
personnel to enjoy. 
Somehow, Rabbi Meisels joined the group that was assigned to sort these 
possessions. In the course of his work, he found his tallis. Joyously, he 
stuffed it inside his clothes and brought it back to his barracks. He knew that 
in doing so he had taken his life in his hands; if the guards found the tallis 
and realized that he taken it back without permission, he would probably be 
killed on the spot.   
  (cont. next page) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    25 
ד"סב 
(cont.) To minimize the risks, he cut the tallis into a tallis katan which he was 
able to wear underneath his inmates’ garb. This, too, was fraught with 
danger; the gray inmates’ clothing was very thin and upon careful inspection, 
anyone might notice that Rabbi Meisels’s clothing looked somewhat bulkier 
than everyone else's. This, however, was a risk that he was willing to take.  
Incredibly, he wore the tallis katan until the final days of the war. When he 
was working in a labor camp near the city of Branzweig, the sound of 
American gunfire could be heard in the distance. In attempting to flee, the 
Nazis took with them those Jews who still remained alive. Before boarding 
the cattle cars, the inmates were searched in case they had anything of value. 
It was then that the tallis katan was discovered. A German guard named 
Willy ripped the garment off Rabbi Meisels’ body and threw it into a fire as 
the Rav watched in horror. 
Rabbi Meisels was devastated. He believed that the tallis katan had been a 
source of protection for him. Now, with the Germans in a panic as the 
Americans bore down on them, the danger was perhaps greater than ever. 
And his tallis katan was gone. Still, Rabbi Meisels knew that the other Jews 
who had survived to that point had done so without the benefit of a tzaddik's 
tallis katan. Just as Hashem had watched over them, He would continue to 
watch over him.   
  (cont. next page) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    26 
ד"סב 
(cont.) Willy, the wicked guard who had destroyed the tallis katan, was one 
of those in charge of the car carrying Rav Meisels and his son, Zalman Leib. 
Darkness fell and Rav Meisels attempted to sleep in the only way possible: 
as he stood. He turned his head to the left and rested it upon the shoulder 
of his son. Later, Zalman Leib would rest his head upon his father’s shoulder. 
This was how they had slept on all their cattle car journeys since the war had 
begun. 
Rav Meisels had been asleep a few minutes when he was awakened by his 
son’s anguished voice. “Tatte (Father), my shoulder hurts so much! I'm sorry, 
but I can’t take the pain any longer.” Rabbi Meisels had no choice but to raise 
his head, though he found his son's complaint strange, since they had slept 
this way many times before. Rabbi Meisels’ neighbor to his right then told 
the Rav to rest his head upon his shoulder, while Zalman Leib, now also 
overcome by exhaustion, placed his own head upon his neighbor to his left.    
Moments later, the sound of American warplanes was heard. The drone of 
the engines soon mixed with the sound of gunfire as the Air Force crews, 
mistakenly assuming that the train was carrying German soldiers, strafed the 
train. Suddenly, the gunfire ripped a hole in the roof of the car in which Rabbi 
Meisels stood, and shot directly between the tilted heads of the Rav and his 
son — hitting Willy and tearing off both his hands. Soon after, the sounds of 
the planes grew fainter as they headed off. The Jews in the car were all 
unharmed.    (cont. next page) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    27 
ד"סב 
(cont.) Willy screamed in agony and pleaded for the others to do something 
for him. One of the other guards called out sarcastically, “Well, Willy, | guess 
you won't be able to throw the Jew’s prayer shawl into the fire anymore.” 
Upon hearing these words, Willy turned to Rav Meisels and begged 
forgiveness. 
Rav Meisels still had with him a small Book of Tehillim, from which he had 
never stopped praying since the German invasion had begun. Now, he and 
his son sang a chapter in unison, “... Behold! The Guardian of Israel does not 
sleep, nor does He slumber... .” 
One of the Jews in the car, who was not religious, said to Rabbi Meisels, 
“Please continue to pray for us. It is obvious that G-d is watching over you. 
And just as He made that gunfire miss your heads and punish your 
persecutor, so may He soon rescue us all from these evil tyrants” (Sefer 
Mekadshei Hashem). 
Adapted from Shabbos Stories by Rabbi Shimon Finkelman, Parshas Shelach, Artscroll 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    28 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
ם תֹרֹד ל םֶהי ֵד ג ב יֵפ נ  כ־ל ע– for THEIR generations. 
In Biblical times, until the times of the Greeks, 
the common practice was to wear a rectangular, 4 cornered garment, 
in the form of a shawl, toga, etc. 
For them it was obvious that they were בייח to wear תיציצ. 
ל"זח saw in the word 
' 
ם
ת
ר 
ד ֹ
ל ֹ
' 
for their generations, 
that even when the styles change 
and 4 cornered garment is not regularly worn, 
there is a הוצמ throughout all generations  
to specifically wear a 4 cornered garment, ןטק תילט,  
to fulfill this special הוצמ. 
(חל קרפ רבדמב לנברבא) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    29 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
ם תֹרֹד ל םֶהי ֵד ג ב יֵפ נ  כ־ל ע– for THEIR generations. 
The placing of the word ם ת ר ד ל in the קוספ is very interesting. 
It is written after the הוצמ of placing תי צי צ on our garments,  
and before the commandment to place a string of תלכת,  
thereby having the word 
' 
ה
' 
ם ת ר ד ל
'
only referring to the white strings. 
knew that there will be a time when ת ל כ  ת will be hidden away. 
Through placing 
' 
ם ת ר ד ל
'
specifically in this location in the  קוספ, 
'ה was telling us, 
“You may think that even though there is no תלכת the הוצמ of תי צי צ stops. 
That is not so, for 
'
ם ת ר ד ל
'
, continue for all generations 
placing only the white strings ם הי ד ג  ב י פ נ  כ ל ע”. 
) 
יפ ינב
(
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    30 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
תלכת ליתפ – A string of bluish wool 
What is the root of the word ליתפ? 
The י צ נ
ב 
"
comments: 
the source of the word ליתפ is connected to the name י ל  ת פ נ. 
When ה א ל named her son, she said 
“י  ת ל  ת פ נ םי ק ול א י ל ו ת פ נ – I schemed and made plans“ 
(by trading the flowers with ל ח ר). 
We take the ליתפ, string, of ת ל כ  ת,  
which represents our connection with ה
' ,  
and we wrap it around and around the other strings,  
(which represent the human body) 
to instill within us the knowledge,  
that all the plans,  
and all that goes around in life, is only from 'ה. 
(
) 
רבד קמעה
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    31 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
תֶלֵכ  ת – Bluish wool 
The goal of תלכת 
ל"זח tell us, the bluish color of the ת ל כ  ת, 
reminds us of the blue of the ocean. 
When one thinks about the vastness and greatness of the blue ocean, 
he will come to think of the (blue) sky. 
When thinking of the expanse of the sky, 
he will come to think about Hashem and the ד וב  כ ה א ס  כ 
(which in םירצמ had placed ‘under it’ a blue sapphire stone 
to show הרצב יכנא ומע, that always, 
even through and especially through our hard times, Hashem is with us). 
Through our power of association,  
the ת ל כ  ת brings us to ם י מ  ש ת א ר י, an awareness of  'ה,  
and thereby an aid in םכיניע ירחאו םכבבל ירחא ורותת אלו. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    32 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
תֶלֵכ  ת – Bluish wool 
We are royalty! 
Over history (particularly in the 3rd century C.E.) 
the ruling government forbade the usage of ת ל כ  ת for תי צי צ,  
reserving the special color only for royalty and nobility  
(hence the name ‘royal blue’).  
When we look at the ת ל כ  ת and realize that we are royalty,  
as our father is The King,   ונ  כ ל מ  וני ב א,  
(see multiple ת וי נ  ש מ in ת  ב  ש and other locations),  
it brings us to behave and act differently,  
realizing we have a special role in the world.  
) 
יפ ינב
(
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    33 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
תֶלֵכ  ת – Bluish wool 
Reach your  תילכת 
The word תלכת is similar to word תי ל כ  ת, purpose and destiny,  
for through thinking about the color of the ת ל כ  ת,  
we come to our תי ל כ  ת 
of tying ourselves to 
ך ר  ב ת י .  
 '
ה
) 
יפ ינב
(
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    34 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
וֹתא םֶתי א ר ו - And you shall see it 
Due to these words, many wear their תיציצ out, to be constantly visible. 
There was once a king who was involved in a war. The fighting raged on for many 
years. After many endless battles that led to no victory, the king appointed a new 
general with new warfare and strategies.  Shortly after this appointment, the new 
general devised a plan and ended the war victoriously. 
When the general returned home from his brilliant win, the king held a ceremony to 
honor the general in front of the whole city. The entire city lined the streets cheering 
and waving to show him honor.  “You are our hero” they all shouted!!!   
The king called the general up in front of all the people and pinned a shiny badge of 
honor onto his lapel of his coat and pronounced that he would not only be the general, 
but he will also be a nobleman!!!  The general nodded his head and then took the 
medal of honor off of his coat and hung it inside of his jacket. 
Can you imagine the reaction of the king – I gave you a badge of honor  
and you don’t display it publicly – you hide it from view inside your jacket?!! 
The Chofetz Chaim elaborates: 
The world was lacking spirituality – the war was raging. 
After many generations 'ה appointed a new general – לארשי ללכ.  
The townsfolk, the people of the world, are cheering on this ‘general’ realizing that 
they owe him a tremendous debt of gratitude for saving them. 
As a sign of appreciation and of our special position, the King of kings, gave us a badge 
of honor, our תיציצ. Thus, our badge of honor should be displayed proudly and openly 
and not tucked away, out of sight from all. (If it would be dangerous, of course that is different.) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    35 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
וֹתא םֶתי א ר ו - And you shall see it 
We are referring to the תיציצ, of which there are multiple. 
If so, why does the קוספ say ‘You shall see’ “ א 
ות ” ‘it’ in singular form,  
instead of 
The word 
" 
ו
ת 
א 
"
"
ם ת וא
"
, them, plural form? 
aside from meaning ‘it’ can also mean ‘him’. 
Perhaps this is to remind us that the purpose of looking at the תיציצ 
is not just to see ‘it’, the תיציצ,  
but rather through the תיציצ which reminds us of all the תווצמ,  
(along with the תלכת which hints to the דובכה אסכ) 
to see ‘HIM’, Hashem, in all that we do.  
(יפ ינב) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    36 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
וֹתא םֶתי א ר ו - And you shall see it 
The word for ‘it’/’him’ is usually spelled "ותוא" with a 'ו' after the  'א'. 
Here the הרות spells it 
'
ות 
 א 
'
, without the middle 'ו'. 
Perhaps this is to further connect us to Hashem,  
for without the middle 'ו'  
it is as if the קוספ is written, ‘And you shall see 
' 
ו ת א
' 
with Him’, -  
when you look at the תיציצ the objective is to ‘see’ Hashem,  
reminding us of our רשק with Him. 
(Optimally  תלכת is connect us to think of  'ה through association).  
(יפ ינב) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    37 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
'ה תֹו צ מ־ל  כ־תֶא םֶ ת ר כ ז ו 
AND YOU WILL REMEMBER ALL THE תווצמ OF  'ה 
How does תיציצ help us remember all the תווצמ? 
Gematria of תי צי צ = 600, 
 ) 
400
=ת ,
10
=י ,
90
=צ ,
10
=י ,
90
=צ(
+ 8 Strings on each corner 
+ 5 knots on each תיציצ  
= 
613!      
!ג"ירת 
The amount of mitzvohs in the הרות! 
י
"
( שר
) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    38 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
םֶכיֵני ֵע י ֵרֲח א ו םֶכ ב ב ל י ֵרֲח א  ור ות ת אֹל ו 
AND YOU WILL NOT STRAY AFTER YOUR HEART AND EYES. 
How does looking at our תיציצ affect the thoughts of our heart? 
The strings of all the תיציצ combined equals 32 strings – 
8 strings on each corner x 4 corners. 
This is the same   אירטמג of בל, our heart. 
When we look at our תיציצ and internalize it’s message, 
the השודק assists us in combating the  
םכבבל
(See ‘םכידגב יפנכ לע’ above) 
( יפ ינב) 
ירחא ורותת אלו
. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    39 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
Windings of the תיציצ - 1 
י 
"
שר
asks, why is the ה  ש ר  פ of תי צי צ written next to the ה  ש ר  פ of תבש? 
He answers that just like תבש is equal to all the תווצמ, 
so too תי צי צ is equal to all the ת ווצ מ. 
תבש is a reminder of Hashem creating and running the world, 
תיציצ is a constant reminder of the same (see תלכת ליתפ above). 
The א"רג points out the 
תיציצ 
תבש
connection can been seen further by 
analyzing a breakdown of the 39 ת וכא ל מ and the wrappings of the תי צי צ.  
The 39 תוכאלמ broken up into categories: 
תוכאלמ needed to 
produce skins 
תוכאלמ needed to 
produce building 
תוכאלמ needed to 
produce dyes 
תוכאלמ needed to 
produce cloth 
7
8
11
The order of the wrappings of תיציצ:* 
1
st
set
2
nd
set
3
rd
13
set
7
8
11
4
th
set
Fascinating! 
13
*Please note: there are different minhagim for the order of the wrappings 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    40 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
Windings of the תיציצ - 2 
Sefardim wrap the strings of the תיציצ in sets of 10, 5, 6, 5. 
Ashkenazim wrap the strings of the תיציצ in sets of 7, 8, 11, 13. 
What is an idea behind these numbers? 
According to the Sefardi style of winding,  
each winding represents another letter in the Hashem’s Name of  םימחר 
10
ה = 
5
,ו =
6
,ה =
5
,י =
According to the Ashkenazi style:  
When 7 is added to the 8, it equals Hashems name of הק.  
(using here a 'ק' instead of a 'י
' ) 
Next wrapping of 11 is then added, which brings us to 26,  
the אירטמג of Hashems name of םימחר – ק ו ק י.  
The final winding is 13 times, which is the אירטמג of דחא. 
Putting these together we get דחא קוקי, in as such,  
our wrappings are a further testimony and a reminder to us  
that 
דחא . 
 '
ה
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    41 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
Windings of the תיציצ - 3 
What is an idea behind the 7, 8, 11, 13 of the windings? 
7 - Hashem created the world with 3 dimensions. Each dimension starts at a point and 
spreads out into 2 directions – up, down, east, west, north & south, hence the number 
7 signifying a completion of the physical world - 7 colors in a rainbow, 7 seas, 7 
continents, 7 musical notes etc. 
This is why ‘7’ plays a significant role in Yiddishkeit, the physical world being a 
manifestation of the spiritual – תבש, הטימש, days of חספ and תוכוס, רמועה תריפס etc.  
8 - As 7 symbolizes nature, the number 8 symbolizes עבטה ךרדמ הלעמל – the 
power to rise above nature. הלימ תירב is on the 8th day, giving us power to rise 
above our natural instincts. On הכונח, the סנ lasted 8 days specifically, rising above the 
עבט, ‘Mother Nature’ ideology of the Greeks. 
11 - ‘11’ refers to the stars of ףסוי’s dream - a reference to the heightened spiritual 
power of the Yid as in the הכרב of ה
' 
13 – ‘13’ corresponds to the 
to םהרבא of ךערז היהי הכ.  
'
גי
םימחרה תודמ – the way ה' deals with kindness in the 
world, and the 
'
גי
םהב תשרדנ הרותהש תודמ – ways the הרות is extrapolated. 
It is also the אירטמג of the הבהא and דחא signifying ה
' ’s Oneness and His ultimate 
connection with לארשי ינב.     
ל
"
( רהמ
, Rav Aryeh Kaplan Anthology 2 pg 205,  יפ ינב) 
In summation, 7, 8, 11, 13 are a journey from our physical world directly to 'ה. 
We start off bringing השודק to the physical world around us, move on to the world 
above the physical, up into the heavens, and onto the דובכה אסכ.  
So much is built into this special הוצמ of תיציצ! 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    42 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
ם י ר צ מ ץ ֶרֶאֵמ םֶכ תֶא י תאֵצֹוה רֶ שֲא  
The םירצמ connection 1 
The manifestation of Hashem’s presence and redeeming us from  םירצמ 
is constantly stressed throughout the ה ו צ מ of תי צי צ. 
o ם כי ד ג  ב יֵפ נ  כ ל ע – We placed the תיציצ on corners of our garment. 
which reminds us that Hashem showed his tremendous love and care for 
ל א ר  ש י ל ל  כ when he carried them  ‘on the wings of eagles’, as stated  
םי ר  ש נ יֶפ נ  כ ל ע ם כ ת א א  ש א ו          
)י"שר( 
o We place תיציצ on a 4 cornered garment corresponding to the               
4  ת ונ וש ל and levels of ה ל וא ג that Hashem did for us when we were 
taken out of םירצמ - 
י  ת ח ק ל ו         
 ,
י  ת ל א ג ו
 ,
י  ת ל צ ה ו
 ,
י תא צ וה ו
) 
 י
"
שר
(
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    43 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
ם י ר צ מ ץ ֶרֶאֵמ םֶכ תֶא י תאֵצֹוה רֶ שֲא  
The םירצמ connection 2 
The blue color used on תיציצ is the blue called ת ל כ  ת. 
The killing of the first born of םירצמ is called םי ר וכ  ב ל ו כ  ש. 
ס ול ק נ וא ם וג ר  ת translates the word לוכש killing as א ל כ  ת,  
reminding us of the סנ and דסח that 'ה did for us through this הכמ. 
(
) 
י
"
שר
The color of  ת ל כ  ת is similar to the color of the sky as it turns dark,  
which is the night, when ת ור וכ  ב ת  כ מ took place.  
) 
י
"
שר
(
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    44 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
ם י ר צ מ ץ ֶרֶאֵמ םֶכ תֶא י תאֵצֹוה רֶ שֲא  
The םירצמ connection 3 
There are 8 strings on each of the תיציצ. 
There were 8 days from when the ל א ר ש י י נ  ב shechted the ח ס  פ ן  ב ר ק,  
until the singing of ה רי  ש by the ף וס ם י. 
The shechting of the חספ ןברק was the beginning of the spiritual 
redemption of the לארשי ינב, 
as shechting the sheep was a physical act of destroying and eradicating the 
Egyptian god from within themselves. ( שר
י
"
) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    45 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
The תיציצ - לארשי עמש connection 
In the הלפת of עמש one of the three תוישרפ is the השרפ of רמאיו  
which primarily discusses תיציצ.  
If it was just to mention םירצמ,  
there are many other תוישרפ in the הרות that mention םירצמ.  
What is the connection between עמש and תיציצ that they are put together? 
The core statement of the opening statement of  עמש is  דחא 'ה. 
In תיציצ we take one garment – א, 
On it we place 8 strings – ח, 
On each of its 4 corners –  ד 
Reminding us again that ד חֶא 'ה 
(םולש תוביתנ) 
(See also windings of the תיציצ 2 above) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    46 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
THE DOUBLE KNOTS 
Permanently connected! 
A double knot represents permanence.  
This reminds us of our permanent connection with Hashem and His  הרות, 
no matter what we have done.  
The ).דמ תוחנמ( ארמג tells a story of a man  
who was very tempted to do an הריבע.  
As he was about to, his תיציצ hit him in the face and he refrained.  
Perhaps as he noted the double knot of the תיציצ,  
he was reminded that no matter how far we have fallen,  
we are permanently connected to 'ה. 
)יפ ינב( 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    47 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
THE FIVE DOUBLE KNOTS 1 
Tied to the הרות 
As תיציצ represents the  תווצמ ג"ירת,  
the double knot represents the two parts of הרות –  
that of בתכבש הרות and of הפ לעבש הרות.  
There are specifically five sets of double knots,  
for all of it is hidden in the 
הרות ישמוח
השמח
. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    48 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
THE FIVE DOUBLE KNOTS 2 
Serve Hashem with your whole being 
תיציצ represents the תווצמ ג"ירת.  
It is a הוצמ that we wrap our whole body with, 
as we are to keep His הרות with our whole being - 
הנרמאת יתומצע לכ. 
The five sets of double knots furthers this concept, 
as they represent our five senses, 
seeing, smelling, hearing, tasting, and touching 
which we are to tie and bind into our serving of 'ה. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    49 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
EIGHT STRINGS 
You can do it! 
The number 8 represents going beyond nature (see windings above). 
The eight תיציצ are reminding us  
not to be complacent and satisfied with the status quo in our  'ה תדובע,  
rather to push ourselves, overcome our challenges,  
and reach for the stars! 
(the next winding level of 11 😊) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    50 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
Tzitzis!!!!!!!! 
After WWII the Klausenberger Rebbe was in one of the DP camps,  
where he received four sets of tzitizis. 
There were 150 DPs clamoring for those four sets.  
How would he decide who to give them to? 
The Rebbe decided that he would raffle them off.  
A Gerrer chassid went and tore his shirt in a way that created four corners, 
making it now obligated in tzitzis. He approached the Klausenberger, 
“Rebbe, everyone else has a mitzvah to wear tzitzis, but are not obligated,  
I have a four-cornered garment - I have an obligation, I should get them.”  
The Rebbe replied,  
“I said I was going to make a gorel, so that is what I need to do.  
However, someone that shows such desire to do a mitzvah  
will certainly receive divine help.” 
Lo and behold, that Gerrer chassid won one of the sets of tzitzis!! 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    51 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
HOLDING תיציצ IN DAVENING: רמאש ךורב - 1 
At the end of רמאש ךורב some hold their תיציצ. Why?  
One of the  םיקוספ discussing the mitzvah of תיציצ states, 
"ךל השעת םילידג" - “You shall make for yourself twisted threads”. 
The אירטמג of the word םי ל ד  ג is 87, 
hinting that when we recite Baruch She’amar, which contains 87 words, 
we should hold our תיציצ. 
What is the specific connection between רמאש ךורב and  תיציצ? 
See upcoming Lu.L.L.A.Y.’s 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    52 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
HOLDING תיציצ IN DAVENING: רמאש ךורב - 2 
At the end of רמאש ךורב some hold their תיציצ. Why?  
Why only two? 
In the first part of Baruch She’amar we say Baruch (“blessed”) 10 times. 
(excluding when it is said as an added praise when mentioning Hashem, such as Baruch Hu) 
These 10 correspond  
to the 10  תורמאמ (utterances) with which Hashem created the world. 
We hold the two tzitzis which contain 5 knots each,  
reminding us of these 10 
תורמ 
א
מ
and Whom we are praising. 
Additionally, these 10 ‘Baruch’s correspond to the 
תורבדה
תרשע
,  
the bedrock of the הרות, and Yiddishkeit. 
Hence, we hold two תיציצ, which correspond to the two תוחול, 
each which contains five knots,  
corresponding to the five תורבד on each of the תוחול. 
As we prepare to sing praises to 'ה with the opening words of הרמזד יקוספ,  
we hold the תיציצ to remind us of Hashems Mastery of the world and His הרות. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    53 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
HOLDING תיציצ IN DAVENING: רמאש ךורב - 3 
At the end of רמאש ךורב some kiss the front two תיציצ. Why?  
Why only two? 
Each set of תיציצ has eight strings and five knots, adding up to 13.  
When we gather the two front fringes together, we have 26,  
which is the אירטמג of Hashem’s Name,  
This reminds us as we enter into הרמזד יקוספ,  
not just to say the words but to focus on Hashem,  
Whom we are saying them to.  
(Rav Schwab on Prayer) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    54 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
HOLDING תיציצ IN DAVENING:  עמש תאירק 
When we say the words ץראה תופנכ עבראמ in the הכרב of  הבר הבהא 
and ask 'ה to gather of from the four corners of the earth,  
some gather all the תיציצ together, also known as תופנכ עברא,  
and hold them in the left hand between the pinkey and ring finger.  
(Some hold this is a hefsek and don’t gather them) 
When we begin saying רמאיו, the השרפ which discusses the הוצמ of תיציצ, 
we take the  תיציצ also into the right hand,  
kissing them when the word 'תיציצ' is said  
and placing them over the eyes when saying ותוא םתיארו.  
(The הרורב הנשמ says placing over the eyes is a הלוגס for sight.) 
They are also kissed when saying תמא and דעל in ביציו תמא.  
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    55 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
Buckle up your tzitzis! 
There was a talmid who was struggling with the mitzvah of tzitzis. 
His parents tried many incentives but he didn’t ‘bite’. 
They asked him to wear them one more day, afterwards they wouldn’t push. 
The boy agreed and headed off to yeshiva. 
That day, on the way (not sure to or from yeshiva) there was a terrible storm. 
Due to the torrential rain and winds,  
the bus driver lost control and went straight into a tree.  
Upon impact the windshield shattered and the driver was injured.  
When Hatzolo arrived on the scene they were made aware  
that there was still a talmid in the back of the bus.  
They went back to rescue this talmid who should have been thrown across 
the bus from the impact, but he was still in his seat…  
stuck to it, because his tzitzis got caught in the seat,  
locking him into place like a seat belt and protecting him from harm  
(Heard from Rabbi Moshe Liebowitz) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    56 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
For just a few kopeks 
At the end of his life, the Vilna Ga’on was lying in a bed and crying.   
One of the people standing near him came close to him and asked  
“Rebbi, why are you crying?” 
The Ga’on picked up his תיציצ and began to cry harder and said  
“In this world for just a few kopeks (cents) you can buy a pair תיציצ,  
wear it all day, and get rewarded for every moment that you are wearing it.   
Where I am going, no money in the world can give me even one more הוצמ, 
even with effort I cannot reach to a greater level!” 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    57 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
Shem and Yefes covered Noach, their father, when he became drunk and unclothed.  
As a reward they both received a type of a covering in the future.  
Shem’s grandchildren were given the mitzvah of tzitzis.   
Yefes’ descendants in the war of of גוגמו גוג will merit to be buried.  
Chom, who degraded his father, was punished with his descendants becoming slaves. 
The Shem Mishmuel enlightens us on the three sons and their differences. 
Chom was unfazed and unabashed by his father being unclothed, as he related to man 
no differently than to an animal. Just as animals do not wear clothing, neither do 
humans need clothing. Therefore, he was punished to be a slave to serve his fellow 
man, just as animals function for the service of man. 
Yefes recognized the beauty and dignity of man and felt it was out of place for man to 
be unclothed. Therefore, his reward was to be accorded the proper respect for men to 
be buried, and not lay as carcasses in the open field. 
Shem recognized something deeper.  
He saw the neshama inside man and his inner spiritual beauty. He recognized that the 
body of a human is like a garment to the soul. Not only was it undignified for Noach to 
be unclothed, and a disgrace to the holy neshama that’s inside, but he also recognized 
that the body, the housing for the neshama, is holy and needs to be covered.  
This prompted him to jump and initiate the covering of his father.  
In line with his action, Shem was rewarded with tzitzis, a spiritual mitzvah  
that transforms and gives a higher purpose to the physical garment they are on. 
Tzitzis reminds us to use our bodies, the clothing for our true essence, our neshama, 
for its’ higher purpose. 
(Rabbi Baruch Bodenheim) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    58 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
Why optional? 
Rav Chaim Pinchos Scheinberg ל"צז was well known  
for his hiddur in wearing many garments of תיציצ.  
We have learned from all that above that  
תיציצ is an extremely special  הוצמ which has so much in it! 
If so, why did Hashem make it optional –  
one only needs to wear תיציצ if they are wearing a four cornered garment? 
(םימכח instituted the הוצמ of wearing a ןטק תילט being that it is so special) 
As תיציצ represents all the תווצמ, Hashem specifically made it optional, 
teaching us that the true way to come close to Hashem and his הרות,  
is by exercising our הריחב, free choice, and making the right decisions in life. 
Even the תוצמ we are obligated to do,  
we should be doing because we want to, not because we must. 
May we be zoche. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    59 
ד"סב 
השיבל רדס 
Clothes makes the man/woman 
םירצמ 
תולג
was extremely difficult, with לארשי ינב being enslaved  
to the most powerful and influential country in the world. 
Even so, ל"זח tell us, one of the ways that לארשי ללכ stood apart was in 
their manner of dress. This safeguarded לארשי ינב to the point that the 
Torah itself testifies )רבדמב ףוס( that aside from one exception out of millions 
of people, there was no promiscuity and intermarriage with the Egyptians, 
Knowing that we are the children of the םישודקה תוהמא & תובא, 
assisted them and us to maintain the dignity and self-value  
throughout תולג of being a proud member of לארשי ללכ. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    60 
ד"סב 
השיבל רדס 
The whole world is filled with His glory. 
Our body was formed and given to us by Hakadosh Baruch Hu. 
Even when it is dark and/or in private,  
e.g. a bedroom or bathroom,  
there are halochos of תועינצ that apply. 
These תוכלה are not due to our bodies being an object to be ashamed of,  
rather of an acute awareness that ודובכ ץראה לכ אלמ,  
the whole world is filled with His glory. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    61 
ד"סב 
השיבל רדס 
Do it right 
Throughout the הרות, and with regard to many  תוצמ,  
the right side is given more תובישח. 
הלבק יפ לע, the left side represents ןיד,  
while the right side represents םימחר.  
Understandably, we want the םימחר to rule over the ןיד. 
This concept is not just in תווצמ but applies to many areas,  
including getting dressed. 
When getting dressed,  
the right side should be dressed first and then the left. 
When getting undressed,  
the left side should be removed first, then the right. 
(Due to this concept, some are particular that the flap covering the buttons 
should be on the right side with the buttons on the left) 
Giving precedence to the right side for these halochos is the same  
even if one is a ‘lefty’. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    62 
ד"סב 
םילענ - השיבל רדס 
‘Hilchos Shoes’ - the greatness of Yiddishkeit 
An officer in the Russian government,  
in an attempt to belittle the Jewish nation,  
told the Czar how foolish the Jewish rules are.  
“They are so detailed 
they even have rules telling them how to tie their shoes!” 
The Czar in his wisdom replied,  
that having rules even for shoes,  
actually shows the greatness of Yiddishkeit,  
for it is not just random rules that are applied at random times,  
rather it is a lifestyle that is governed  
at all times by the rules of their Torah. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    63 
ד"סב 
םילענ -  השיבל רדס 
Tie them right left 
The א ר מ ג brings a ת ק ול ח מ which shoe should be put on first –  
the right or the left. 
One ר מ א ד ןא מ holds the right shoe is put on first, 
since the right is always more important in Yiddishkeit. 
The other   ר מ א ד ןא מ holds that just like ןי לי פ  ת is put on the left hand, 
we should first put the shoe on the left foot. 
(More on the shoe/ןיליפת connection in next Lu.L.L.A.Y ה"עב) 
We pasken that we fulfill both of these – 
we put on the right shoe first, but don’t tie it, 
then we put on the left shoe, tie it, and then tie the right shoe. 
Lefties, who put ןיליפת on their right hand, have a different order,  
“Righties”: 
Put on right shoe 
Put on left shoe 
Tie the left shoe 
Tie the right shoe 
“Lefties”: 
Put on right shoe 
Tie the right shoe 
Put on left shoe 
Tie the left shoe 
When removing shoes, we should take off the left one first. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    64 
ד"סב 
םילענ - השיבל רדס 
Why do we put on and tie our shoes in such a manner? 
Although we usually give importance to the right side first,  
by shoes we tie the left first, since ןי לי פ  ת is put on the left hand. 
By other  תוצמ we don’t have this deference.  
What is this special connection between shoes and ןי לי פ  ת  
that we say since ןי לי פ  ת is on the left, we tie the left shoe first? 
HaRav Akiva Eiger ל" צ ז ( ע"וש לע א"ער תוהגה) explains in the name of the ך ל מ ה ק מ ע: 
After the war of the 4 kings against the 5 kings,  
the king of םודס offered   וני ב א ם ה ר ב א a part of the spoils of war. 
 
וני ב א ם ה ר ב א refused to take anything, for he did not want anyone to think  
that they are responsible for his wealth, rather it is all only from Hashem. 
In the  ת וכ ז of ם ה ר ב א refusing with saying "ל ע נ ך ור ש ד ע ט וח מ ם א",  
the ל א ר ש י י נ  ב were  ה כ וז to two תו ו צ מ. 
Because of “ט וח מ ם א - from a thread”,  
we were given the ה ו צ מ of תי צי צ & ת ל כ  ת, which are threads. 
Because of  "ל ע נ ך ור ש ד ע" – or a shoestrap,  
we were given the ה ו צ מ of ןי לי פ  ת ת וע וצ ר – the straps of the ןי לי פ  ת. 
Since we were  ה כ וז to  ןי לי פ  ת ת וע וצ ר in the ת וכ ז of ם ה ר ב א refusing "ל ע נ ךֹור ש ד ע" 
“not even a shoestrap”, the two became automatically connected. 
Therefore, just like ןי לי פ  ת is placed on the left hand, we commemorate and give 
ת ובי ש ח to the left shoe strap (lace) which is the source for  ןי לי פ  ת ת וע וצ ר. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    65 
ד"סב 
םילענ - השיבל רדס 
Saved by his shoes - 1 
There was a Yid who unfortunately was engaged to marry a non-Jew.  
On the day of his wedding, as he was getting dressed,  
he realized that instinctively he put on his right shoe,  
then his left shoe,  
then tied his left,  
and then tied his right.  
Shocked and realizing that halocho was still rooted within him,  
he quickly rethought his life and what he was about to do. 
On the spot, he ran out of the wedding hall, never to return to the hall, 
instead to a full return to his Jewish heritage.     
(Heard from Rabbi Moshe Liebowitz) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    66 
ד"סב 
םילענ - השיבל רדס 
Saved by his shoes - 2 
A soldier was in the process of becoming religious. 
He wanted to take upon himself a halocho 
that he could keep easily while in the army. 
He decided to keep the halocho of 
putting on and tying his shoes in the proper order. 
One morning, he realized that he put on his shoes wrong 
and decided to start over from scratch. 
As army boots can take some time to lace and unlace 
he was delayed in getting out and to his unit. 
His unit, that left without him, was on a helicopter mission, 
which unfortunately crashed, claiming the lives of those on board. 
His adherence and determination to keep this halocho, saved his life. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    67 


Shlomie & Batsheva 
Boehm Family
Tishrei Companion
5786
Stories and Insights from your Favorite TorahAnytime 
Speakers to Enhance Your Yamim Noraim
Compiled by 
RABBI ELAN PERCHIK
THE ULTIMATE SEGULA
Email Us: Shimon@TorahAnytime.com OR Call/Text: 917-681-0003
JOIN NOW TorahAnytime.com/DailyDollar
OTHER DONATION OPTIONS
JOINING THE TORAHANYTIME $1 A DAY PROGRAM WILL:
$2 A Day $3 A Day
$5 A Day $10 A Day
Show your Hakaras Hatov 
to TorahAnytime.
Help with new projects 
and initiatives.
Give you the Zchus of 15 
million hours of Torah learning.
TorahAnytime is proud to present 
its latest special Tishrei Compan
ion, sure to enhance your Yamim 
meaning, wisdom and inspiration. 
Culled from the lectures of re
nowned TorahAnytime speakers, 
this Companion provides a mix of 
illuminating insights and stories 
for you and your family.
Back in print by popular demand, 
TorahAnytime video and audio lec
tures can now be brought to life to 
engage the hearts and minds of you, 
your family and friends with the 
written word. Infusing meaning 
and joy to this special time of year, 
it is hoped that this compendium 
will leave you inspired long after 
the Yamim Noraim end and keep 
you growing as a dedicated Jew.
 
 
Ketivah V’Chatimah Tovah,
Shimon Kolyakov 
Rubin Kolyakov 
Yosef Davis
 
 
 
TorahAnytime was started in 2006 by 
two Bukharian brothers, Shimon and 
Rubin Kolyakov, from Queens, New 
York, who were joined by Yosef Da
vis in 2007. They wanted to share the 
Torah classes given in their Queens 
Bukharian community with their 
friends and family. Over the years, it 
grew into a revolution. 
TorahAnytime currently has more 
than 400,000 Torah videos from over 
lectures are posted each week, with 
over 1.2 million annual visitors from 
187 countries, and as you read this, 
these numbers are growing rapidly. 
Beginning with one camera gifted 
by their parents, today more than 
15 million hours of Torah are being 
learned every year through Torah
Anytime’s platforms, including its 
website, mobile app, phone hotline, 
publications, and so much more is 
yet to come.
About
5786
SCAN ME
Lovingly and gratefully, we dedicate this booklet
in honor and memory of
ל״ז יולה השמ ןבואר ףסוי רבחה ןב חרז
ל״ז הירא ףסוי ברה ןב בד לאומש
ה״ע םייח תב לדנעי
ה״ע ןורהא השמ תב הבוט
ל״ז ןהכה ןושרג ןב לאומש
ל״ז יולה רזעילא ברה ןב יבצ
ה״ע םהרבא תב המחנ
ה״ע אדוהי בקעי תב רמת
Lovingly and gratefully, we dedicate this booklet
in honor and memory of
ל"ז יולה קחצי םהרבא ןב בקעי
ה"ע ךלמילא יבצ תב לחר ׳גוזו
ל"ז יכדרמ המלש ןב הירא
ה"ע יבצ השמ תב לטיג היח ׳גוזו
ל"ז רכששי ןב ןרהא
ה"ע יבצ יכדרמ תב לזייר רמת ׳גוזו
ל"ז יולה אגרש לאקזחי ןב רשא יבצ
ל"ז ןהכה ריאמ הירא תב הקבר ׳גוזו
Lovingly and gratefully, we dedicate this booklet
in honor and memory of
ל״ז יולה השמ ןבואר ףסוי רבחה ןב חרז
ל״ז הירא ףסוי ברה ןב בד לאומש
ה״ע םייח תב לדנעי
ה״ע ןורהא השמ תב הבוט
ל״ז ןהכה ןושרג ןב לאומש
ל״ז יולה רזעילא ברה ןב יבצ
ה״ע םהרבא תב המחנ
ה״ע אדוהי בקעי תב רמת
Lovingly and gratefully, we dedicate this booklet
in honor and memory of
ל"ז יולה קחצי םהרבא ןב בקעי
ה"ע ךלמילא יבצ תב לחר ׳גוזו
ל"ז יכדרמ המלש ןב הירא
ה"ע יבצ השמ תב לטיג היח ׳גוזו
ל"ז רכששי ןב ןרהא
ה"ע יבצ יכדרמ תב לזייר רמת ׳גוזו
ל"ז יולה אגרש לאקזחי ןב רשא יבצ
ל"ז ןהכה ריאמ הירא תב הקבר ׳גוזו
To reserve a dedication for the Haggadah Companion or the next 
Tishrei Companion please call/text +1917-789-6043 
or email Shimon@TorahAnytime.com
תמשנ יולעל
 קחצי ןב םייח לארשי
בוד רכשי תב דבכוי
 Dedicated by Binyamin 
Indig & Family
Dedicated by 
“ Anonymous” 
from the 
South Monsey community
Dedicated by 
Chesky and Gitty Brown for the 
Refuah Shelema of Noam Yisroel ben Yocheved
 תמשנ רכזל
ל"ז םוחנת 'ר ןב והילא דוד ברה
 ה"ע יולה לאיחי השמ ה"רומ תב םירמ
 ה"ע םחנמ יכדרמ רתלא 'ר ןב בייל הירא 'ר 
ה"ע ןהכה םייח לאירזע ןימינב 'ר תב םירמ רתסא
רעקעב תחפשמ תאמ
To reserve a dedication for the Haggadah Companion or the next 
Tishrei Companion please call/text +1917-789-6043 
or email Shimon@TorahAnytime.com
Contents
PREPARING FOR ROSH 
HASHANAH
6    Rabbi Paysach Krohn
8    Rabbi Ephraim Eliyahu Shapiro
10  Dr. David Lieberman
11  Rabbi Bentzion Shafier
ROSH HASHANAH
13  Rabbi Yoel Gold
15  Rabbi Benzion Klatzko
18  Rabbi Shlomo Horwitz
20  Rebbetzin Esther Jungreis a”h
22  Rabbi Zechariah Wallerstein zt”l
24  Rabbi Shlomo Farhi
26  Rabbi Daniel Glatstein
28  Rebbetzin Tzipora Harris
29  Rabbi Jeremy Golker
ASERET YEMEI TESHUVAH
32  Mrs. Yael Bertram
34  Rabbi Yechiel Spero
36  Rabbi Joey Haber
38  Rabbi David Ozeirey
40  Rabbi Asher Weiss
42  Rabbi Doniel Staum
44  Rabbi Mashiach Kelaty
YOM KIPPUR 
46  Rabbi YY Jacobson
48  Mr. Charlie Harary
51  Rebbetzin Slovie Jungreis-Wolff
53  Rabbi Mordechai Kalatsky
56  Rabbi Berel Wein zt”l
SUKKOT
58  Rabbi Aryeh Kerzner
60  Rabbi Avi Slansky
62  Rabbi Avi Wiesenfeld
64  Rabbi Binyomin Pruzansky
65  Rabbi Dovid Goldwasser
68  Rabbi Ephraim Wachsman
70  Rabbi Fischel Schachter
71  Rabbi Yisroel Majeski
5
PREPARING FOR 
ROSH HASHANAH
Rabbi Paysach Krohn
The Memory That Still Sings
We are accustomed to arise early in the morning to recite Selichos and 
supplications… (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chaim 581:1)
It was the summer of 1964.
Every year, I had gone to camp, but that year, my father had 
a different idea. “I want you to go to Eretz Yisrael,” he told me. 
“Take your reel-to-reel tape recorder, record the speeches you hear, 
and visit the gedolim. You’ll grow from the experience.”
It was my first time on a plane and first time overseas. In my 
mind, Eretz Yisrael was mostly farmland and sheep. I never imag
ined it had real traffic, apartment buildings and telephone booths. 
But I quickly discovered that it was a modern country like any oth
er, yet with a neshama unlike any other.
I traveled all over the land, visiting great rabbanim. In those days, 
since international phone calls were nearly impossible, you needed 
to go to the post office and schedule an appointment to make a call. 
So we wrote letters. My parents wrote to me, and I wrote back.
One day, my father’s letter included a request. He had heard 
that in Jerusalem, there was an old Yid who would wake people for 
Selichos in the early hours of the morning. “I know it’s early,” my 
father wrote. “Three or four o’clock. But if you can find him and 
record his voice, it would mean so much to me.” I didn’t know the 
man’s name, where he lived, or even if he was alive.
I asked around, and while most people said that yes, there used 
to be someone, no one was sure if he was still around or still doing 
it. Eventually, I found out that the man’s name was Reb Yiddel Co
hen, an older gentleman who lived near the Mandelbaum Gate in 
6
Tishrei Companion 5786
Jerusalem.
So I grabbed a friend, and at 3:30 a.m., we went searching 
through the dark Jerusalem streets. Suddenly, in the distance, we 
saw a small figure standing in front of a two-story building. He was 
calling out something. But what?
As we got closer, we finally made it out:
“Shteyt oif far slichos! Shteyt oif far slichos!” Wake up for Selichos! 
Wake up for Selichos!
It didn’t sound like much. It carried no melody or extraordinary 
emotion, and just seemed like a practical call to get up. I remember 
thinking, “That’s it? That’s what my father meant?”
Still, we ran toward him. He was startled as two teenagers with 
a massive reel-to-reel recorder charged at him in the middle of the 
night. He froze. I assured him in my broken Hebrew, “Don’t worry, 
we’re Americans. It’s okay.” I then went on to elaborate.
“My father back in America remembers someone who used 
to sing a beautiful niggun to wake up the city for Selichos, and he 
asked me to find that person and record it. Do you know who that 
is?” He looked me up and down, suspiciously. Then he nodded 
and said: “Dos bin ich—That’s me.”
I was stunned. “That’s you? But you didn’t sing anything!” He 
shrugged. “Do you know what this machine is? It’s a tape recorder. 
If you sing into it, my father will be able to hear your voice when 
I go back to America. Would you do that for me?” He hesitated, 
looking me over once more. And then… he cleared his throat.
And he sang. I will never forget it.
The streets were silent and the homes were dark. The Mount 
Scopus Hotel, then across the border in Jordan, was the only light 
shining in the distance. And this older Yid lifted his voice in the still 
Jerusalem night and sang the most hauntingly beautiful tune I had 
ever heard:
“Yisroel am kodesh, shteyt oif la’avodas haborei… Ratz katzvi v’gibor 
ka’ari, la’asos retzon avicha she’bashamayim—Israel, holy nation, rise 
up to serve your Creator. Run like a deer, be strong like a lion, to do 
the will of your Father in Heaven.”
I brought that recording back to America and my father must 
have listened to it a hundred times. He cherished it.
That winter, 1965, was the first time Rav Sholom Schwadron 
7
Tishrei Companion 5786
zt”l, the famed Maggid of Yerushalayim, came to America. I still re
member sitting at our dining room table. “Rav Sholom,” my father 
said, “I want to bring you back in time…” And then he played the 
tape.
Tears filled Rav Sholom’s eyes.
“I remember that,” he said, his voice breaking. “When I was a 
boy, that Yid used to wake us up for Selichos. I’d hear his voice at 
four in the morning... and then pull the blanket over my head and 
go back to sleep.” He smiled through his tears. “But how sweet, 
how beautiful, how unforgettable it was.”
That song was more than a melody. It was a call to awaken our 
souls. “Yisroel am kodesh…—You are a holy nation. “Shteyt oif la’avo
das haborei…—Get up and get moving to serve your Creator.”
That is Elul, the days of mercy; the time to prepare for Rosh 
Hashanah and Yom Kippur.
Let us wake up not just our bodies, but our hearts. Let us run 
like deer and rise like lions. Let us return to our Father in Heaven, 
with teshuvah, tefillah, and tzedakah.
And maybe, just maybe, if we listen closely this year, we’ll still 
hear the echo of that old Yid’s voice ringing through the Jerusalem 
night...
“Yisroel am kodesh… shteyt oif…”
Watch this video on TorahAnytime:
Scan the QR code with a phone 
camera or enter this link online:
MyTAT.me/v324483
Listen to this audio on the TorahAnytime hotline: 
USA 718-298-2077 
Israel 072-398-2980 
UK 0330-1170305 
Canada 647-797-0056
Then dial extension 9324483#


Rabbi Ephraim Eliyahu Shapiro
If Only
“Hashem is King, Hashem was King, Hashem will be King…” 
(Rosh Hashanah Shacharis Prayers)
As we enter the sacred days of Elul, we encounter a month of 
closeness with Hashem, of introspection within ourselves, 
and of possibility for our future. But what does that gift 
really mean?
8
Tishrei Companion 5786
Let me offer a perspective.
Elul is spelled Aleph, Lamed, Vav, Lamed. If you reverse those 
letters, you get the word Lule, which in Hebrew means “if only.” If 
only I had made that call; if only I had apologized; if only I had made 
the right choice when I still had the chance.
Lule is the language of regret.
Elul is the opportunity to reverse Lule. It’s the moment Hashem 
gives us to avoid living with “if only.” Elul empowers us to act 
now—to repair, to call, to reconnect—before the window closes. 
That is the transformative power of this month.
The Gemara (Shabbos 88a) states that when the Jewish People 
received the Torah, Hashem held Har Sinai over them like a barrel, 
declaring, “If you accept the Torah, good. But if not, ‘Sham tehei 
kevuraschem—There will be your burial place.’”
Why does Hashem state that “there” will be your burial place? 
If the Jewish people were underneath the mountain, wouldn’t it 
make more sense to say “here”?
Rav Yaakov Galinsky zt”l offered a piercing insight. So many 
people live with a “Sham” mindset. When I get there, then I’ll learn. 
When I retire, when the kids are older, when things settle down… 
then I’ll daven better, then I’ll give more tzedakah, then I’ll change.
But what happens? That “Sham,” that imaginary future, never 
comes. It’s a moving target. A person waits their whole life for the 
next stage, and the next, and the next… until the opportunity is 
gone. Sham tehei kevuraschem. If you live always waiting for “there,” 
that may become your spiritual burial.
Elul calls us back to the now.
The Torah tells us, “Mipnei seivah takum—Before the elderly, 
you shall rise” (Vayikra 19:32). The Kotzker Rebbe interpreted this 
homiletically. Before things get stale—before your inspiration be
comes old and fades—get up. Act now. Don’t let the moment ex
pire. Don’t let the feeling pass. Seize the awakening while it’s fresh. 
Too often we wait… and we wait… until it’s too late.
That is why the order in our daily tefillah is so striking. We say, 
“Hashem Melech, Hashem Malach, Hashem Yimloch—Hashem is King, 
Hashem was King, Hashem will be King.” But that seems out of or
der. Normally, we speak in terms of past, present, and future. Why 
begin with the present?
9
Tishrei Companion 5786
Because if we start by looking only at the past—at our mistakes, 
our missed opportunities—we may become overwhelmed. It’s too 
much, I can’t fix all this, I’ve fallen too far. We freeze and we give 
up. So Hashem tells us: don’t begin with the past. Begin with the 
present. Hashem Melech—Right now, I am your King. Start now. 
Take the first step and begin today, and then, with that momen
tum, you’ll reach back and repair the past. Ultimately, with that 
approach, you’ll chart a path to a brighter future.
It’s like Daf Yomi. If someone falls behind by fifty blatt (pages), 
they may say, “I’ll never catch up,” and so they stop. But what’s the 
advice of the wise? Start with today’s Daf. Keep going from there. 
The past will come in time.
So too with teshuva. Don’t be stuck in “Lule” and don’t live with 
“Sham.” Don’t let inspiration go stale. Mipnei seivah takum. Start 
with now and you will get there.
That’s the gift of Elul.
Watch this video on TorahAnytime:
Scan the QR code with a phone 
camera or enter this link online:
MyTAT.me/v254940
Listen to this audio on the TorahAnytime hotline: 
USA 718-298-2077 
Israel 072-398-2980 
UK 0330-1170305 
Canada 647-797-0056
Then dial extension 9254940#
Dr. Dovid Lieberman
Optimize Today
Our Father, Our King… (Liturgical Prayer)
As we prepare for Rosh Hashanah, here is a small suggestion 
to optimize its spiritual potential.
We recite Avinu Malkeinu, “Our Father, Our King,” ac
knowledging Hashem as both a loving parent and a sovereign rul
er. But such a declaration cannot be reserved solely for the liturgy 
of Rosh Hashanah. If we wish to genuinely crown Hashem as King, 
it must be reflected in the way we live each day leading up to it.
It is incongruent to live our lives governed by fear, insecurity, 
or the approval of others, and then suddenly, on Rosh Hashanah, 
proclaim Hashem as King. To declare Hashem’s kingship authenti
cally, we would best practice that truth consistently.
What does it mean to live with Hashem as King? It means 
10
Tishrei Companion 5786
choosing what is right and responsible, even when it is uncomfort
able, even when it might provoke disapproval, or cost us socially 
or emotionally. If I know what I must do, but hold back because 
of how others might perceive me, then in effect, I’m saying, “This 
person, or this fear, rules my life; not Hashem.”
To walk into Rosh Hashanah with sincerity and integrity, we 
must begin in Elul by aligning our daily actions with the awareness 
that Hashem is truly in charge. That is our avodah: to uphold what 
is true and just, even when it’s hard, even when it requires cour
age. When we live this way in the days leading up to Rosh Hasha
nah, our declaration of Hashem’s sovereignty becomes more than 
words. It becomes an honest reflection of our lived reality.
So if you want to optimize Rosh Hashanah, begin by optimizing 
today. Let each decision between now and then reflect the quiet, 
resolute truth: Hashem is King.
Watch this video on TorahAnytime:
Scan the QR code with a phone 
camera or enter this link online:
MyTAT.me/v255501
Listen to this audio on the TorahAnytime hotline: 
USA 718-298-2077 
Israel 072-398-2980 
UK 0330-1170305 
Canada 647-797-0056
Then dial extension 9255501#
Rabbi Bentzion Shafier
Inside the Bear
And let everything with a neshama (soul) proclaim, “Hashem Is 
King…” (Rosh Hashanah Prayers)
One of the fascinating creatures in the natural world is the 
brown bear. Standing near the top of the food chain, it 
would appear to live with ease. Its diet is remarkably var
ied, consuming berries, grasses, insects, carrion, fish, and more. To 
all appearances, the bear has little difficulty finding sustenance.
Yet its great challenge is not variety, but scarcity. For months on 
end, in the starkness of winter, the landscape offers virtually noth
ing. To survive, the brown bear hibernates, withdrawing into a state 
of near immobility, living off the fat reserves it amassed during the 
warmer seasons. But Hashem, in His wisdom, implanted within 
the bear an instinct to prepare. As soon as it emerges from its win
11
Tishrei Companion 5786
ter refuge, it begins eating relentlessly. In the spring, it consumes 
berries and shrubs; and as summer advances into late August and 
September, it enters a state of hyperphagia, an almost unquench
able hunger. During this period, bears have been observed eating 
continuously for twenty-four hours at a stretch: two hundred thou
sand berries in a single day, or tens of thousands of moths in one 
sitting. In autumn, when the salmon run begins, the bear positions 
itself at the river, swiping fish mid-leap, devouring them whole.
Now imagine, for a moment, what it would feel like to inhabit 
the body of such a bear. Imagine your own mind, your own per
sonality, placed inside, but driven by the bear’s insatiable hungers. 
You wake in spring with a gnawing need to eat, pulling termites 
from a log and swallowing them, only to recoil in disgust at what 
you have just consumed. You chew grass, scavenge through gar
bage, seize fish with your claws and gulp them down, revolted yet 
compelled. Hour after hour, day after day, you are driven by an 
overwhelming appetite.
That, I believe, is the parable for human existence. Hashem 
placed the neshama, holy and pure, into a body, into a “bear.” The 
body possesses instincts, hungers, and appetites that at times can 
horrify the soul that inhabits it. Yet this is precisely the condition 
into which Hashem placed us. Our task is not to despise the body, 
but to harness it, to master its urges, and to elevate its drives to
ward higher purpose.
There are, however, two common mistakes we make.
The first is to look at one’s desires and say, “What’s wrong with 
me? I’m disgusting.” But the truth is, you did not create your body. 
Hashem did. The drives for pleasure, for honor, for power, for jeal
ousy, for anger are universal. They are not a verdict on your es
sence. They are the “bear” that every human is given. The question 
is not, “Why do I have these drives?” but rather “How do I contend 
with them? How do I train them, channel them, master them? Am 
I growing year by year?”
The second mistake is even more dangerous: to identify with 
the bear. To say, “This is me. I am nothing more than my appetites, 
my failures, my sins.” That is false. No matter what one has done, 
the soul remains distinct from the body. You are not the bear; you 
are the one inside the bear. The body will clamor and pull, and at 
12
Tishrei Companion 5786
times it will overpower you. But your essence, your neshama, re
mains separate and untarnished.
When a person recognizes this truth, life becomes clearer. The 
battles of the spirit are many and often bitter, and there will be vic
tories and losses. Yet the mission remains constant: to keep fight
ing, to keep growing, to keep striving for mastery. Hashem, in His 
kindness, gave us the Torah—the ultimate nourishment for the 
soul—and a system of mitzvos that trains and elevates.
This is the reality of human existence: a soul of infinite holiness 
placed into a body of insistent demands. And our task is lifelong. 
We are to harness the bear, to never confuse ourselves with it, and 
to grow, step by step, into the person Hashem intended us to be
come.
Watch this video on TorahAnytime:
Scan the QR code with a phone 
camera or enter this link online:
MyTAT.me/v136085
Listen to this audio on the TorahAnytime hotline: 
USA 718-298-2077 
Israel 072-398-2980 
UK 0330-1170305 
Canada 647-797-0056
Then dial extension 9136085#
ROSH HASHANAH
Rabbi Yoel Gold
Bless You
For a good year may you be inscribed and sealed (Shanah Tovah Greetings)
When Zev Zilber and his wife were invited to a wedding in 
Los Angeles, they were thrilled. It was going to be their 
very first time in California, and they couldn’t wait. They 
arrived the night before the wedding, picked up their rental car, 
and set off for the hotel. Everything was going smoothly.
Until it wasn’t.
As they drove through the Pico-Robertson area, the car sud
denly began to shake. Zev pulled over and quickly realized they 
had a flat tire. He sighed. “Really? This is how I’m starting off in 
California? A flat tire?”
13
Tishrei Companion 5786
Trying not to panic, he told his wife to stay in the car while he 
went to find help. A block or two away, he spotted a shul which had 
just finished Maariv. Zev approached the first man walking out and 
asked if he might be able to help with the flat.
Without hesitation, the man said yes. He rolled up his sleeves, 
walked over to the car, got down on his knees, and within fifteen 
minutes had the spare tire in place. Zev was stunned and deeply 
grateful. Reaching for his wallet, he said, “Please, let me pay you.” 
But the man just shook his head. “I didn’t do it for the money.” 
Undeterred, Zev handed him his business card, saying, “If 
you’re ever in New York and you need anything, please, call me. 
But seriously, what can I do for you right now?” Something in 
Zev’s sincerity must have touched the man, because for a moment 
he paused, and then said quietly, “Actually… there is something. 
I’ve been married many years… and we don’t have children. All I 
want is a beracha.”
Zev was taken aback. He wasn’t a Rosh Yeshiva or a Gadol. He 
wasn’t even someone particularly known for giving blessings. But 
he felt the weight of the moment, and he couldn’t turn away from 
it.
So he took the man’s hand, closed his eyes, and standing there 
on Pico Boulevard at 11:15 p.m., he gave him the most heartfelt 
blessing he could muster: Hashem should bless him and his wife 
and they should merit to have a child.
That was it.
Ten months later, Zev’s phone rang.
“Hi… you remember me? I helped you with the flat tire.” “Of 
course,” Zev said. The man’s voice trembled. “My wife just gave 
birth.”
Zev couldn’t believe it. “I’m not a Lamed-Vav Tzaddik,” he later 
recounted. “I’m not a Rabbi. I’m not anything special. I’m just a 
regular Yid. But I wanted to give him something real, something 
sincere. And so, I gave him a beracha from the bottom of my heart.”
You never know what a sincere blessing can do for another Jew. 
Never take the giving of a beracha or the receiving of a beracha light
ly.
The night of Rosh Hashanah is one when we wish one anoth
er: “L’Shanah Tovah Tikasev V’seichasem—You should be written and 
14
Tishrei Companion 5786
sealed for a good year.” It might seem like simple words, offered 
as a token of friendly goodwill. But it goes far beyond that. Do not 
view the blessing of a simple person as light in your eyes (Berachos 
7a). Any Jew, every Jew, holds tremendous power in the words 
which escape their mouth. Let us appreciate this ability, value 
this opportunity and turn it into some memorable. Perhaps, even, 
life-changing.
May Hashem bless you and your family this year with bounti
ful goodness. And may you bless others, just the same. 
Watch this video on TorahAnytime:
Scan the QR code with a phone 
camera or enter this link online:
MyTAT.me/v143434
Listen to this audio on the TorahAnytime hotline: 
USA 718-298-2077 
Israel 072-398-2980 
UK 0330-1170305 
Canada 647-797-0056
Then dial extension 9143434#
Rabbi Benzion Klatzko
A Beautiful Flight
Who has kept us alive, sustained us, and brought us to this time 
(Shehechiyanu Blessing)           
Sometimes, moments in our life which seem to hold no poten
tial carry more than we would have expected. Let me tell you 
about one such time.
Zahava, my daughter, was on her way to Eretz Yisrael. You 
know how it is when you’re about to board a long flight—eight, 
nine, maybe ten hours—and you find yourself hoping that the per
son seated next to you is at least friendly, maybe even open to con
versation.
As it turned out, Zahava ended up next to a woman who was 
clearly Israeli and looked to be in her late middle age. But she also 
clearly looked hardened and worn, her face set in a permanent 
scowl. She didn’t greet Zahava or even acknowledge her presence. 
It was evident that she had no interest in chatting with an 18-year
old seminary girl. So Zahava kept to herself.
At some point mid-flight, something unexpected happened. A 
child a few rows ahead did something genuinely funny. And for 
the first time, the woman broke into a small, reluctant smile. Za
hava smiled too. She saw an opening and gently took it. Turning 
15
Tishrei Companion 5786
to her, she commented, “That was pretty funny, huh?” Then, im
pulsively, she added, “You know, you’re actually very beautiful.” 
The woman looked at her, startled. “No,” she said, flatly. “I’m not 
beautiful.” Tough response. But Zahava didn’t let go.
“What’s your name?” Zahava asked. “Rina,” the woman re
plied. “Well,” Zahava smiled, “I think I’ll call you Rina HaYafah 
(Rina, the beautiful).” The woman looked at her, almost amused. 
“Rina HaYafah?” she repeated. Something inside her had softened. 
The cracks in her armor began to show.
They spoke for a few minutes. And then, almost suddenly, the 
woman’s expression shifted. The smile faded… and she broke.
“I know I look angry and I know I seem harsh. But why 
shouldn’t I be?” she said. “I had one son, and he was murdered on 
October 7th. I have no one left, except an elderly mother I care for... 
and a dog. That’s it. I’m furious with G-d. I don’t believe anymore. 
How could G-d take my only child from me?” Zahava sat in silence. 
You never know who you’re sitting next to. You never know the 
story behind someone’s scowl.
Zahava reached out and gently took Rina’s hand. And as she 
did, tears dropped from her eyes, falling upon her cheeks. And 
when Zahava cried, Rina cried too. The two of them, strangers just 
hours before, were now weeping side by side in airplane seats, 
bound together in pain.
“What was your son’s name?” Zahava finally asked. “Rami,” 
Rina got out, her voice cracking between her words. “I’m so sor
ry…” Zahava whispered. “I’m so sorry…Your loss is our loss. I 
want to do something in Rami’s memory.” “He doesn’t need any
one to do anything for him,” Rina said, regaining some of her voice. 
“He’s where he should be. I’m not worried about Rami.” “I’m not 
doing it for him,” said Zahava. “I want to do something for myself, 
so I can feel connected to him.”
After a long pause, Rina spoke up. “When you go to the Kotel, 
pray for him. Have him in mind.” “I’ll do that,” Zahava promised, 
“but only if you come with me.”
And to Zahava’s surprise, Rina complied. “Okay. I’ll come with 
you.”
This same woman, who just minutes earlier said she no longer 
believed in G-d, now agreed to accompany a seminary girl to the 
16
Tishrei Companion 5786
Kotel. She started calling Zahava, “Zahava HaNesicha,” Zahava the 
Princess, as Zahava continued calling her Rina HaYafah.
They kept in touch over the phone in the days that followed. 
And just before Rosh Hashanah, the two of them went together to 
the Kotel and prayed for Rami.
Life is filled with infinite opportunities to bring Kavod Shamay
im, honor to Heaven. In every moment, in every encounter, there’s 
a possibility to lift the world a little higher.
This year, more than ever, I’ve heard people say, “I’m not feel
ing it.” And truth be told, I’ve felt that way too. There’s a heaviness 
in the air, a kind of emotional numbness. The world is overwhelm
ing, and our minds are scattered.
The Gemara (Eruvin 65a) rules that a person who has just trav
eled is exempt from davening for three days. When one travels, it 
leaves the mind confused, or fatumult as they say in Yiddish. Since 
prayer requires kavana, concentration, when your thoughts are all 
over the place, you can’t connect. Of course, we still daven because 
these days we rarely have the full scope of kavana anyway. But the 
Gemara is pointing to something deeper, and that is that our ability 
to stand before G-d is tied to our ability to be mentally present. And 
if just travel can disorient the soul, how much more so the chaos of 
our world today?
But we don’t want these days of Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kip
pur to pass us by. We don’t want to look back on the Yamim Nor
aim and realize we waited too long for inspiration that never came. 
The gates are open this time of year, and many of us may still be 
waiting to feel something.
But perhaps there is another way to look at it. Perhaps now, 
right now, is the moment. Perhaps right now is the moment when 
we look at our life and say, “It is beautiful and I am the princess. 
Hashem wants me to return, no matter what.” 
Maybe today is the day and tonight is the night. Even if you’re 
not feeling it, even if you don’t have answers, even if everything 
around you is uncertain and unknown. This moment is beautiful 
and the opportunity is awaiting.
So grab hold, with whatever breath you have left in you, and 
reach forward. Reach forward, however slightly you are able. 
Rina HaYafah would tell you so.
17
Tishrei Companion 5786
Watch this video on TorahAnytime:
Listen to this audio on the TorahAnytime hotline: 
Scan the QR code with a phone 
camera or enter this link online:
MyTAT.me/v326369
USA 718-298-2077 
Israel 072-398-2980 
UK 0330-1170305 
Canada 647-797-0056
Then dial extension 9326369#
Rabbi Shlomo Horwitz
The Day I Found Happiness 
“Go eat choice foods and drink sweet drinks... for the day is holy to our 
G-d” (Nechemiah 8:10)
One Friday afternoon, just three hours before Shabbos, I 
found happiness.
Literally.
I had walked into the local Whole Foods in Baltimore to pick up 
a few groceries and buy flowers for my wife and mother-in-law. As 
I approached the cashier, she greeted me with a warm smile and I 
smiled back. And then I noticed something unusual: her name tag.
It said Happiness.
At first, I assumed it was some sort of branding strategy; maybe 
a company initiative encouraging positivity. But when I glanced 
over at the cashier in the next lane, her name tag read “Donna.” 
That’s when it clicked.
I looked back and asked, “Excuse me… is Happiness really your 
name?” She smiled again and said, “Yes, it is.” Without missing a 
beat, I said, “I’ve been looking for you my entire life.”
She burst out laughing. And in that moment, something struck 
me. Maybe that’s not just a joke; maybe that’s the truth. We’re all 
searching for happiness, but we often look for it in the wrong plac
es.
There is a halachic discussion as to whether simcha, joy, is an 
actual obligation on Rosh Hashanah (see Rambam, Hilchos Megillah 
V’Chanukah 3:6; Mishnah Berurah 597:1). Unlike Sukkos or Pesach, 
where “V’samachta b’chagecha—And you shall rejoice on your festi
val” is a clear commandment, Rosh Hashanah seems to lean more 
toward awe and judgment. And yet, the book of Nechemiah tells us 
that the people were indeed commanded to rejoice on Rosh Hasha
nah (Nechemiah 8:10). So where does that joy come from?
Rabbi Simcha Zissel Ziv, the Alter of Kelm, offers a profound 
18
Tishrei Companion 5786
answer. “Who are the happiest beings in the universe?” he asks. 
The angels, he explains. They are flawless and they serve Hashem 
all day, without distraction, without sin. And moreover, what is 
the greatest pleasure imaginable? To be close to Hashem. That’s the 
core of our eternal reward in Olam Haba.
With that in mind, think about Avraham Avinu. After his bris 
milah, he sits in the heat of the day, and Hashem Himself comes to 
visit him (Bereishis 18:1). Imagine being in direct communion with 
the Divine, and yet, when three guests approach—strangers, per
haps idolaters—Avraham turns to Hashem and says, “Please wait; 
I have guests to care for.” Why would he do that?
The Alter of Kelm explains that as incredible as it is to be with 
Hashem, doing His will—fulfilling His commandments—is an 
even greater pleasure. Avraham knew that Hashem desires chesed, 
and so he chose to express his love through action. And Hashem 
agreed.
This is the happiness of Rosh Hashanah. It is not the happiness 
of easy living or temporary comfort, but the deep joy that comes 
from living a life of meaning. Rosh Hashanah is the day we recom
mit to living for something greater than ourselves. We proclaim 
Hashem as our King and we resolve to do His will, even when life 
is confusing, even when the path is hard.
And that, too, is hinted at in the words of the prophet Yirmiya
hu: “So says Hashem: I remember the kindness of your youth, the 
love of your bridal days; how you followed Me into the wilderness, 
into an unsown land” (Yirmiyahu 2:2).
It wasn’t just loyalty. It was love. The Jewish people followed 
Hashem into the unknown, without guarantees, without comfort. 
It was just trust.
But this verse isn’t just about the past. It’s about us. Every one 
of us has a midbar, a wilderness, in our lives, which carries uncer
tainty, pain, loneliness or fear. And Hashem is asking: “Will you 
follow Me even there? Will you stay loyal when it’s uncomfortable? 
Will you choose commitment over convenience?”
That is the joy of Rosh Hashanah. It is the joy of knowing that 
no matter where we are, we can bring meaning into our lives by 
choosing Hashem. We can find happiness not in having everything, 
but in being something—being His.
19
Tishrei Companion 5786
So yes, I found Happiness one Friday in Whole Foods. But the 
truth is, I’ve been searching for it my whole life, and maybe so have 
you. But now I know, happiness isn’t just a name on a name tag. 
It’s the name of a life lived with loyalty, purpose, and connection 
to Hashem.
This Rosh Hashanah, may we all find that kind of happiness.
Watch this video on TorahAnytime:
Scan the QR code with a phone 
camera or enter this link online:
MyTAT.me/v161519
Listen to this audio on the TorahAnytime hotline: 
USA 718-298-2077 
Israel 072-398-2980 
UK 0330-1170305 
Canada 647-797-0056
Then dial extension 9161519#
Rebbetzin Esther Jungreis a”h
The Call to Home
Let everything that has been made know that You are its Maker 
(Rosh Hashanah Shacharis Prayers)
I remember not feeling well one day and going to the doctor. The 
ENT proceeded to prescribe a medicinal gargle that, he warned, 
“Tastes terrible.” I smiled and said, “Thank you.” And I meant 
it.
Why?
Because if I want to heal, I need the medicine. If I want to get 
better, I need to embrace the discomfort that comes with the cure. 
Now imagine I had said to him, “No thanks, I don’t want it. It tastes 
bad.” What sense would that make? I came for help, and help some
times comes in bitter forms.
But here’s the message. What if the tests in your life—the nui
sance, the discomfort, the pain—are the medicine? Have you ever 
considered that the struggles you face may be exactly what Hash
em is giving you to wake up? So how can we come before G-d and 
say, “Please, take away the test,” when the test is the treatment? 
What Hashem wants from us is not to ask for an easier life, but 
to ask for clarity, for direction, for the strength to say: “You are the 
King, and I am Your servant. I will stand when You say stand, sit 
when You say sit, and jump when You say jump. I am here to serve 
You.” And when we live that way—when we accept Hashem’s mal
chus, His Kingship—we begin to heal.
20
Tishrei Companion 5786
That is what Rosh Hashanah is about.
That is why we blow the Shofar. It is about coronating G-d as 
our King. As we recite in our Rosh Hashanah prayers: “V’yeida kol 
pa’ul ki Atah p’alto—Let every creation know that You created it.” 
Once we accept Hashem as King, we stop trying to control life and 
start living calmly.
Now, let’s expand upon this idea. 
To understand any concept in Torah, we must return to its first 
appearance. So let’s ask: what is sin? Where do we first find sin in 
the Torah?
Gan Eden. The nachash (serpent) approaches Chava and says, 
“Did G-d really say not to eat from the tree… because if you do, 
your eyes will be opened, and you will be like G-d” (Bereishis 3:1-5). 
That is the core of sin: the desire to be G-d, to be in charge, to de
clare, “Don’t tell me what to do.” I’ll decide what’s good and what’s 
bad. I’ll choose. I’m an adult, and I am intelligent and autonomous. 
Get off my back.
Sound familiar? Thousands of years have passed, and nothing 
has changed. The serpent’s whisper still echoes. 
So Chava eats, and she gives to Adam, and then suddenly, they 
feel exposed. Why? Because when we sin, we are stripped of truth. 
The illusion fades. What then do we say? Where do we go from 
there?
“For this? For this I gave everything up?” We realize our error. 
For this lobster… I gave up my covenant with Hashem? For that 
shopping spree on Shabbos… I desecrated the holiness of time? For 
that moment… I gave up my marriage? For this ball game, that 
golf course… I walked away from davening? Suddenly, we feel ex
posed, empty and regretful.
So what do Adam and Chava do? They hide behind the very 
tree they sinned with. Just like we do. We sin… and we sink deep
er. We fail… and then say, “It’s too late for me.” We scream, swear, 
lash out, and then say, “That’s just who I am.” We make our sin our 
identity.
But then comes the voice. Suddenly, we hear it. “Ayeka—Where 
are you?” (ibid. 3:9). G-d calls out to Adam, as if G-d doesn’t know 
where he is. But of course G-d knows. It is Adam who doesn’t 
know. We don’t know.
21
Tishrei Companion 5786
So Hashem calls to us, “Where are you?” Not to accuse you, 
but to reach out to you. To say, “I love you, I’m still here, I want a 
relationship, I’m calling. Will you pick up?”
“Ayeka” means something else too. Not just where are you, but 
how did this happen?
How did you fall? How did you abandon Shabbos? How did 
you walk away from tefillah? How did anger take over your home? 
How did you lose sight of who you are? Hashem knows, but we 
need to know. Because when we realize how far we’ve drifted, we 
f
inally understand how desperately we want to come home.
And that’s what teshuvah means. Not repentance or guilt, but 
homecoming. Hashem, in His infinite wisdom, paints a divine por
trait of your potential before you’re even born, and it hangs in the 
Heavenly Gallery. That is your truest self. One day, you’ll see two 
portraits: the one Hashem envisioned and the one you lived. And 
in that moment, you may say, “How could I have wasted my po
tential? ” But Hashem says, “It’s not too late. I’m calling you. Come 
home.”
There is no greater privilege than this. As Chazal say: “Ash
reichem Yisrael…—How fortunate are you, O Israel, before Whom 
you are purified” (Yoma 85b). How fortunate are we that we were 
given this gift of teshuvah, the gift of second chances, the gift of a 
loving Father who still calls to us, even when we’ve tried to hide.
Don’t ask Hashem to take away the medicine; instead, acknowl
edge the healing it can bring. Stand before your Father in Heaven, 
and say: “I am Yours. I’m not here to command You what to do. I’m 
here to listen to what You want me to do.”
When you do that, everything begins to change.
May we have the courage to answer the call when Hashem asks, 
“Ayeka—where are you?” Because the greatest answer we can give 
is simply… 
“Hineni—Here I am.” I’m coming home.
Watch this video on TorahAnytime:
Scan the QR code with a phone 
camera or enter this link online:
MyTAT.me/v297
Listen to this audio on the TorahAnytime hotline: 
USA 718-298-2077 
Israel 072-398-2980 
UK 0330-1170305 
Canada 647-797-0056
Then dial extension 9297#
Rabbi Zechariah Wallerstein zt”l
A Reason to Live
22
Tishrei Companion 5786
Remember us for life, O King Who desires Life (Rosh Hashanah Prayers)
After one of my talks when I had spoken about emunah and 
bitachon, and what those ideas truly mean beyond surface 
cliches, a young woman came over to me. She looked seri
ous, almost burdened, and said, “Rabbi, I want to ask you some
thing. But please don’t answer me with metaphors. Don’t tell me 
what you think. I’m asking you a halachic question.”
I told her, “Look, I’m not a posek and I don’t issue halachic rul
ings. But if this is something I can try to answer, I’ll do my best. 
What’s the question?”
She looked me straight in the eye and asked, “Is it permissible 
to daven on Rosh Hashanah that Hashem should give you a disease 
so that you’ll die?”
That was her question.
You don’t need me to explain what kind of anguish a person 
must be going through to even think about formulating such a 
prayer. She went on and said, “I’m frum. I won’t commit suicide; I 
can’t. But I also can’t bear this anymore. Why can’t I ask Hashem to 
take me? Other people daven for things they want—life, children, a 
spouse, parnassah. I don’t want those things. I want out. I want this 
pain to end. So if Hashem really loves me, why can’t I ask Him to 
give me a heart attack or cancer, so that I can just die?”
I looked at her and said, “I don’t rule on questions like this, but 
I don’t believe a person is allowed to pray for death. Just like you 
can’t daven to be allowed to eat pig—it’s not permitted, no matter 
how much you might desire it—this is in the same category. Taking 
your life, even indirectly, is still taking it.”
She didn’t say anything, but I could see from her expression 
that my answer didn’t satisfy her. So I continued.
“But I’ll tell you what I do believe you can pray for this Rosh 
Hashanah.” She raised her eyebrows, almost dismissively, as if to 
say, “Whatever it is, Rabbi, I’m not going to like it.”
“Daven that Hashem should give you a reason to live,” I said. 
“That’s all. Ask Him to give you something—one thing—that 
will make you want to stay. A reason strong enough to carry you 
through the pain.” She paused, her eyes softening a little. “I never 
thought of that,” she said quietly.
23
Tishrei Companion 5786
“Just try it,” I said. “Just pray for that.”
I didn’t draw that idea out of nowhere. It comes from a moving 
story, well known and very real.
In 1967, after the liberation of the Kotel during the Six-Day War, 
there’s a famous photo of three soldiers standing near the Kotel, 
their heads tilted, as if gazing upon the battered history and bold 
destiny of the Jewish people. For the first time in nearly two thou
sand years, Jews were standing freely at the Western Wall. 
The atmosphere was charged with an intensity that felt almost 
surreal, as if time itself had paused. Soldiers stood pressed against 
the stones of the ancient Wall, their hearts overflowing, their minds 
overwhelmed. Among them, both religious and non-religious alike 
were swept by tears. One group of religious soldiers, astonished to 
see a comrade known for his lack of belief overcome with emotion, 
gently turned to him and asked, “Why are you crying? You don’t 
believe in G-d.”
The soldier looked back. “I am crying because I said to G-d, ‘I 
don’t know what I am supposed to be crying about.’”
At a moment like that, this soldier knew something with pierc
ing clarity. If there was a G-d, he wanted to cry. He wanted a rela
tionship. 
That’s where I got the idea from.
I told this girl the same. “You don’t need to pray for your life 
to end. Pray for a reason to want to live. Pray for a reason to cry.”
There are people out there who truly don’t want to live. But 
sometimes, the most honest and the most powerful prayer is sim
ply this: “Hashem, give me a reason to live.”
Those few words reverberate all the way to Heaven.
Watch this video on TorahAnytime:
Scan the QR code with a phone 
camera or enter this link online:
MyTAT.me/v48360
Listen to this audio on the TorahAnytime hotline: 
USA 718-298-2077 
Israel 072-398-2980 
UK 0330-1170305 
Canada 647-797-0056
Then dial extension 948360#
Rabbi Shlomo Farhi
A Dying Wish
“For G-d has heard the cry of the youth” (Bereishis 21:17; 
Torah Reading, First Day)
24
Tishrei Companion 5786
When Rabbi Aryeh Levin was nearing the end of his life, 
he began to cry.
His children gathered around him, puzzled and con
cerned. “Abba,” they asked gently, “why are you crying? All you 
ever did was mitzvot. You lived a life of Torah and kindness. You 
have nothing to fear. Surely, in Olam Haba there’s a special seat 
waiting for you, carved with your name—Rabbi Aryeh Levin.”
But Rav Aryeh Levin looked at them and replied, “I’m not cry
ing for myself.” They were quiet, perhaps thinking he was crying 
for them; for the children he would soon leave behind. But he shook 
his head.
“I’m crying for them,” he said. “For the prisoners sitting alone 
in jail. For the sick people confined to the contagious disease hospi
tal. Who will be their rabbi now?”
He continued. “I was the one who would go to the prisons. I 
saw the humanity in those who had fallen, and tried to uplift and 
rehabilitate their broken lives. I was the one willing to enter the 
hospital wards where contagious disease ran rampant. Someone 
had to care for the forgotten, for the isolated, for the invisible. I was 
the one who would blow the Shofar for them on Rosh Hashanah.”
He paused.
“Who will be their rabbi now?”
His words pierced the hearts of those around him. They weren’t 
just tears of parting; they were tears for those no one else would 
think about. For the prisoner, for the patient, for the Jew on the 
margins. For those about whom the words Matir Asurim (those im
prisoned) and Rofei Cholim (those who are sick) are literal.
His son, Rabbi Refael Levin, stood by his father’s bedside, 
moved beyond words. And in that moment, he made a promise. 
“Abba, every Rosh Hashanah, I will go. I will take your place and I 
will be their rabbi.”
Only then did Rabbi Aryeh Levin find peace.
To have such thoughts at the very end of life—not about one
self, but about others, about the downtrodden, about those who 
might go unnoticed, unheard—that is greatness. That is a heart 
which emulates Hashem Himself, the One who heals the sick, the 
One who frees the captive, the One who never forgets a single soul.
May we merit to have hearts like that beating within us forever.
25
Tishrei Companion 5786
Listen to this audio on the TorahAnytime hotline: 
Watch this video on TorahAnytime:
Scan the QR code with a phone 
camera or enter this link online:
MyTAT.me/v140217
USA 718-298-2077 
Israel 072-398-2980 
UK 0330-1170305 
Canada 647-797-0056
Then dial extension 9140217#
Rabbi Daniel Glatstein
The Inexplicable Shofar
From the straits did I call upon G-d; G-d responded by giving me 
expansiveness (Tehillim 118:5; recited prior to the Shofar blowing)
There is a striking and cryptic comment recorded in the Ma
gen Avraham, one of the most concise and precise halachic 
commentators. Found in Orach Chaim 585:11, it is all the more 
intriguing given that the Magen Avraham was known to write in 
the briefest possible terms. Sometimes, in fact, due to poverty, he 
even wrote his notes on the walls of his home rather than on paper.
And yet, in this instance, he records a story, something highly 
unusual for a work of halacha:
“One time, the ba’al toke’a (one who blows the Shofar) attempted to 
blow, but no sound emerged. He tried everything, but to no avail. Eventu
ally, he turned the Shofar around, and spoke into the wide end the words: 
‘Vihi Noam Hashem Elokeinu Aleinu—And may the pleasantness of 
Hashem our G-d be upon us’ (Tehillim 90:17), and then he turned it back 
around, and it blew.”
That’s it. That’s the comment.
This small anecdote raises a host of questions:
Why is the Magen Avraham including a story at all? His work 
is a halachic commentary, not a collection of tales. Secondly, why 
include a comment about something so esoteric and seemingly su
pernatural when his work focuses on that which is practical? Third
ly, the problem in the story lies with the mouthpiece; the narrow 
end of the shofar. Why, then, would they speak into the wide end? 
And most mysterious of all: why those specific words—“Vihi Noam 
Hashem Elokeinu Aleinu”? What do they have to do with Tekias Sho
far?
To answer this, we must first recognize a foundational truth of 
life. Without Siyata Di’shmaya, without Divine assistance, we can 
26
Tishrei Companion 5786
accomplish nothing. You can have talent, you can have strategy, 
and you can have experience and motivation. But without Hash
em’s help, none of it guarantees success. And so often, when some
thing doesn’t work out, we instinctively assume: maybe I didn’t try 
hard enough. Maybe I need another approach, a better solution, 
more hishtadlus (effort).
But sometimes the problem is not the effort. It’s not the mouth
piece. It’s not your technique. It’s that we need Heavenly help. We 
need Vihi Noam.
The Levush explains that the Shofar is the embodiment of the 
Pasuk: “Min ha’meitzar karasi Kah—From the narrow place I call out 
to You; Anani bamerchav Kah—Hashem answers me from the broad, 
expansive place” (Tehillim 118:5).
We blow from the narrow end. That is our cry, our effort, our 
voice of desperation. But it is Hashem Who responds from the wide 
end, and that represents the answer, the success, the outcome.
Sometimes, when the Shofar doesn’t blow, when life doesn’t 
move, we reflexively think, “I must be doing something wrong.” 
But there are moments when we must pause and realize, “I’ve done 
all I can. Now it’s time to turn the Shofar around and daven.” That’s 
what they did. They turned the Shofar upside down, and into the 
wide end they whispered: “Vihi Noam Hashem Elokeinu Aleinu—Let 
the pleasantness of Hashem our G-d be upon us.”
That Pasuk is famously associated with the building of the 
Mishkan (see Shemos 39:43). The Tolna Rebbe, Rabbi Yitzchak Men
achem Weinberg shlita, explains that the Jewish people were former 
slaves with no architectural experience. How could they possibly 
construct a Mishkan with precision, elegance, and spiritual signif
icance?
The answer is that they did their part, and Hashem did the rest.
The Mishkan was a model of partnership between human effort 
and Divine blessing. Moshe Rabbeinu, along with the Jewish peo
ple, did everything possible toward the building of the Mishkan. 
However, when it came to raising the heavy beams, the Jewish 
workmen were unable, and the endeavor was handed off to Moshe. 
But even Moshe deemed it unable, until Hashem instructed him 
to simply try and do his best, and Hashem would assist (see Rashi 
ibid. 39:33). It was upon this handiwork and effort of man, of the 
27
Tishrei Companion 5786
Jewish people, that Moshe invoked the blessing, “Vihi Noam Hash
em Elokeinu Aleinu— May the pleasantness of Hashem our G-d be 
upon us.” The work of their hands was blessed because they first 
did the work.
This is the eternal message of the Shofar, of Rosh Hashanah, 
and of life itself.
Do your part. Blow into the narrow end and put in the effort. 
But remember: you are not the sole architect of success. When 
things don’t move, don’t just push harder. Pause and daven. Whis
per the words Vihi Noam into the wide end of the Shofar, and ask 
Hashem to help you and lift you up.
Because sometimes, when the world tells you, “Do more,” the 
Torah tells you, “Daven more.”
Watch this video on TorahAnytime:
Scan the QR code with a phone 
camera or enter this link online:
MyTAT.me/v3976
Listen to this audio on the TorahAnytime hotline: 
USA 718-298-2077 
Israel 072-398-2980 
UK 0330-1170305 
Canada 647-797-0056
Then dial extension 93976#
Rebbetzin Tzipora Harris
Looped to Heaven
Today all creatures of the world stand in judgment (Rosh Hashanah 
Mussaf Prayers)
Rosh Hashanah is not just the beginning of a new calendar 
year; it’s the moment when the spiritual DNA of our entire 
year is being formed. These forty-eight sacred hours contain 
immense power. The more compassion we cultivate, for ourselves 
and for others, the more passion, clarity, and connection we’ll expe
rience throughout the year.
But let’s be honest. That’s a lot of pressure. What if I lose my 
cool? What if I feel angry, hurt, or overwhelmed? What if some
thing triggers me and I can’t pull myself together?
Here’s a gentle reframe. What if even the upset is part of the 
plan? What if Hashem, in His infinite love and wisdom, sends us 
moments of emotional challenge on Rosh Hashanah not to push us 
away, but to draw us closer?
Imagine this.
28
Tishrei Companion 5786
A difficult feeling arises, whether it be a painful interaction, a 
moment of shame or anger, or a disappointment that makes you 
question, “Why is this happening now?” You feel a reaction form
ing, perhaps that of a judgment of yourself, of someone else, or 
even of Hashem. But instead of spiraling into guilt or despair, you 
pause. You imagine that this trigger is connected by a golden thread 
straight back to the Divine. Hashem is gently whispering: “Hold 
this, feel this, send it back to Me. Let it connect us.”
In that moment, you don’t need to suppress the emotion or per
fect your response. You simply name it: “Hashem, my heart feels 
raw. This is really hard, and I don’t know what to do with this 
emotion. But I’m bringing it to You.” You take that golden thread 
and loop it back toward Him, turning the moment of distress into 
a moment of intimacy. The upset becomes a portal, the trigger be
comes a tether, and the pain becomes a prayer.
Sometimes, we can say the words of the Machzor, yet our hearts 
remain untouched. So Hashem awakens our hearts through real-life 
experiences, so we can turn to Him not just with lips, but with long
ing. We can say, “Hashem, I can’t do this alone. I need You in this 
relationship. I need You in my healing. I need You in my marriage, 
my parenting, my choices, my disappointment, my feeling of being 
lost.” And when we do that, sincerely, even for just a moment, we 
may come closer to Hashem this year than ever before.
This is the gift of Rosh Hashanah. Not perfection, but connec
tion that is real, honest and vulnerable. May we all be zoche to feel 
this thread, hold it tightly, and loop it back to Hashem in Heaven 
with love.
Watch this video on TorahAnytime:
Scan the QR code with a phone 
camera or enter this link online:
MyTAT.me/v124714
Listen to this audio on the TorahAnytime hotline: 
USA 718-298-2077 
Israel 072-398-2980 
UK 0330-1170305 
Canada 647-797-0056
Then dial extension 9124714#
Rabbi Jeremy Golker
Casting Away More Than Sins
And cast into the depths of the sea all their sins (Micha 7:19; 
Tashliach Prayer)
29
Tishrei Companion 5786
Though it may seem simple, Tashlich is in fact a profound rit
ual, full of meaning and symbolism. Allow me to share an in
sight from Rabbi Immanuel Bernstein, quoting Rabbi Asher 
Weiss, which may transform the way you understand its purpose.
The classical source for Tashlich is the verse in Sefer Micha (7:19): 
“V’tashlich bi’metzulos yam kol chatosam—And You shall cast all their 
sins into the depths of the sea.”
On this basis, the custom developed for Jews to go to a body of 
water on the first afternoon of Rosh Hashanah, after Mincha (or be
fore, depending on custom), and symbolically cast away their sins. 
But there’s more beneath the surface.
The Rama, in his Sefer Toras Ha’Olah, offers a beautiful idea.
When a person stands at the shore of the sea, they are gazing 
at the primordial state of creation. Before Hashem shaped the land, 
divided the waters, and brought forth human life, the world was 
just a formless, watery abyss. It was, in the language of the Torah, 
“Tohu va’vohu—Astonishingly empty” (Bereishis 1:2).
Standing at the edge of the water, then, becomes a moment of 
contemplation. Hashem created this world for a purpose, we think 
to ourselves. He split the sea from the land so that mankind could 
live on it, fulfill its mission, and sanctify life. 
So we walk to the water’s edge to remember why we exist.
On Rosh Hashanah, when we crown Hashem as King, Tashlich 
becomes a declaration of purpose; a moment to remind ourselves 
that we are here to build, to grow, to live intentionally.
The Kitzur Shulchan Aruch (129:21) brings several other reasons 
for Tashlich:
To recall the Akeidas Yitzchak (Binding of Isaac). The Maharil, cit
ing the Midrash Tanchuma (Parshas Vayeira, 22), explains that the 
Satan attempted to stop Avraham and Yitzchak from carrying out 
the Akeidah by turning into a river. However, they forged ahead, 
even as the water reached their necks. Thus, we go to a river to 
commemorate their unwavering determination.
To connect to kingship. Rivers symbolize continuity, power and 
longevity, and serve as the location where kings would be anointed 
in Jewish tradition (Horayos 12a). Just as a king’s reign flows for
ward, so too do we pray for Hashem’s enduring kingship.
To emulate fish. Fish are free from the evil eye (Berachos 20a), 
30
Tishrei Companion 5786
as they always remain hidden and humble. Neither do they have 
eyelids; their eyes are always open. So too, we pray that Hashem’s 
compassionate gaze never closes upon us.
Now comes the central insight. Rabbi Asher Weiss asks a strik
ing question.
If the Akeidah is already referenced so many times on Rosh Ha
shanah—through the blowing of the Shofar, in the Torah reading of 
the second day, in Zichronos, and in numerous tefillos—why do we 
need yet another allusion through Tashlich?
The answer is brilliant.
Tashlich does not commemorate the Akeidah itself. It commem
orates what almost prevented it from happening.
As the aforementioned Midrash tells us, on their way to Har 
HaMoriah, the Satan turned himself into a river, and Avraham and 
Yitzchak nearly drowned. Had they turned back, no one would 
have blamed them. But they didn’t. They kept walking. They 
fought through the water up to their necks, pushing forward with 
unshakable resolve. And when Avraham cried out to Hashem, the 
waters parted. 
That moment, that struggle before the Akeidah, is what Tashlich 
is about.
All of us, throughout Rosh Hashanah, reflect on who we want 
to be. We have dreams to become better spouses, parents, children, 
and friends; to learn more Torah; to deepen our connection with 
Hashem; to fix our flaws and nurture our strengths; and to rise to 
something greater than what we’ve been.
But that’s just stage one.
As soon as we set out on that path, the Satan—external and 
internal—throws rivers in our way. He distracts us, he tempts us, 
and he discourages us. Tashlich is our way of saying: “I know the 
barriers are coming. But like Avraham, I’m ready to wade through 
the waters, up to my neck if I have to. I won’t turn back.”
When you walk to Tashlich this year, don’t just throw your 
sins into the water. Stand by the river, and remember the ocean be
fore creation, before the world had purpose. Remember Hashem’s 
love in giving it shape, meaning, and mission. And then remember 
Avraham walking through the water, and ask yourself: what rivers 
am I willing to walk through to fulfill my purpose?
31
Tishrei Companion 5786
Let Tashlich not just be symbolic. Let it be a moment of resolve 
and a moment when we say: “I’m not just casting away my sins. I’m 
casting away my excuses.”
Watch this video on TorahAnytime:
Scan the QR code with a phone 
camera or enter this link online:
MyTAT.me/v324196
Listen to this audio on the TorahAnytime hotline: 
USA 718-298-2077 
Israel 072-398-2980 
UK 0330-1170305 
Canada 647-797-0056
Then dial extension 9324196#
ASERES YEMEI TESHUVAH
Mrs. Yael Bertram 
Commit, Replace, Change
He spoke and it came into being (Rosh Hashanah Shacharis Prayers)
It’s the Aseres Yemei Teshuvah, the Ten Days of Repentance, and 
there’s no better time than right now to get serious about the life 
we truly want to live. 
A woman told me that over the past few years, her nights had 
been consumed by endless scrolling, watching inane videos, fill
ing her mind with content she didn’t value, and ending her days 
feeling empty. But one night during Elul, something shifted. It was 
late, she was tired, but a jolting thought hit her: “This is beneath 
me. I’m ready to move forward.”
Though she isn’t tech-savvy, she made a decision. “I will not go 
to sleep until I cancel every subscription that is draining my time 
and soul.” She acted then and there, because as we all know: if we 
wait for tomorrow, tomorrow may never come.
What she did was transformative. She lived the wisdom of 
Shlomo HaMelech, who says in Mishlei (6:4): “Do not give sleep to 
your eyes or slumber to your eyelids.” When your soul stirs, don’t 
delay. Act immediately.
But this woman didn’t stop there. She understood that if she 
simply removed a habit without replacing it, the void would even
tually pull her back. So she asked Hashem, “Please help me find 
something uplifting to fill the void in my life.” And she did. She 
found an inspirational speaker, and she now ends her nights with 
32
Tishrei Companion 5786
wisdom, growth and joy. She told me, “I feel like a million dollars.”
What she did has a name: a commitment device.
A commitment device is a one-time action you take while you’re 
inspired to make it harder for your future, more impulsive self to 
go back on your word. It’s the tool that locks in your values before 
your weakness tries to sabotage them.
Here are a few examples:
Internet filters: Have someone else set the password. You’ll thank 
yourself later. Canceling apps or games: If it’s draining your time or 
your soul, remove it. Throwing out questionable clothing: If you’re un
sure about it, let it go. You can’t wear what’s no longer there. Public 
declarations: Tell a friend, “You’re my partner. I’m committing to no 
lashon hara with you.” You won’t want to break your word. Pay in 
advance: Whether it’s a nutritionist or a therapist, prepaying makes 
you far more likely to show up. Bookmarks of meaning: Put Torah 
classes on your favorites bar, and make it easy to choose the right 
inspiration when you reach for your phone.
I once used a commitment device myself. I remember sitting 
with a nutritionist and thinking: what’s going to stop me from run
ning straight to the bakery after this appointment? So I pulled out 
my wallet and prepaid for the next session. Now I had to show up 
because I had skin in the game.
But there’s one more step.
Don’t just remove a habit. Replace it. Ask Hashem to help you 
f
ind something meaningful to take its place. That’s what my stu
dent did, and that’s why she succeeded.
This Yom Kippur, let your commitment be your defense attor
ney. Every subscription canceled, every time limit set, every app 
deleted are not small actions. They are spiritual armor. They come 
with us into shul, and stand beside us as we plead our case before 
the Heavenly Court.
Use the energy of the Aseres Yemei Teshuvah to make one change, 
and then lock it in with a commitment and find a meaningful re
placement. It’s a winning formula. 
Watch this video on TorahAnytime:
Scan the QR code with a phone 
camera or enter this link online:
MyTAT.me/v125219
Listen to this audio on the TorahAnytime hotline: 
USA 718-298-2077 
Israel 072-398-2980 
UK 0330-1170305 
Canada 647-797-0056
Then dial extension 9125219#
33
Tishrei Companion 5786
Rabbi Yechiel Spero
The Chida’s Secret to Change
And what is repentance? That he should abandon his sin and remove 
it from his thoughts, and resolve in his heart that he will never commit it 
again (Rambam Hilchos Teshuva 2:2)
The story is told about the Chida, the great tzaddik and master 
darshan (orator), revered not only for his brilliance in Torah 
and eloquent sermons, but another quality that emerged in 
an otherwise unknown incident. 
The Chida had a particular affinity for shmek tabak, powdered 
snuff. A common amenity in those days, he enjoyed it deeply and 
would frequently take a small pinch between his fingers, sniff it, 
and savor it. It became so much a part of his routine that it was rare 
to see him without it.
When the Chida traveled from Eretz Yisrael to the Diaspora, it 
was customary for him to divide his hosting arrangements, eating 
meals in one person’s home and sleeping in another’s. This allowed 
more people to share the merit of hosting a talmid chacham, and it 
inspired increased giving to tzedakah.
One Friday night, after enjoying a meal at his dinner host’s 
home, the Chida returned to the house where he was staying for 
the night. As he prepared to go to bed, he reached into his pocket, 
only to realize a problem. He had forgotten his snuff at the home 
where he had eaten.
He tossed and turned, trying to fall asleep, but it was no use. He 
couldn’t do it. The craving was too strong. Finally, unable to bear 
it, he quietly slipped out and returned to the dinner host’s home to 
retrieve it.
By the time he arrived, the family had already gone to sleep. 
He tried to knock gently, hoping not to disturb them too much, 
but alas, the knocking woke the household. The maidservants, the 
children, the baal habayis, all were roused from their sleep. When he 
explained what had happened, they graciously retrieved the snuff 
for him. 
The next morning, immediately after the reading of the Torah, 
34
Tishrei Companion 5786
the Chida did something unexpected. He ascended the bima and 
stood before the congregation, overcome with emotion. He began 
to weep deep, uncontrollable tears, and then he spoke:
“Rabbosai, last night, I discovered just how lowly I truly am. To 
have troubled an entire household, to have woken children and ser
vants, all because I couldn’t go one night without a pinch of snuff? 
How could I?”
He paused. The room was silent. And then he continued:
“I beg forgiveness from the baal habayis, from the family I dis
turbed, and from the entire congregation. And I ask you: even 
though I am not worthy, please continue to give tzedakah to Eretz 
Yisrael. And now, al da’as haMakom ve’al da’as ha’kahal, in the pres
ence of Hashem and this entire holy congregation here today, I 
make a vow. From this day forward, I will never take another sniff 
of snuff again—for the rest of my life.”
The community was stunned. To see such a great man, so es
teemed, publicly humble himself, confess a personal weakness, and 
resolve to change… it was unforgettable.
We all have our own shmek tabak—our small addictions, our un
healthy habits, our personal weaknesses. Some are physical, some 
are emotional, some are spiritual. We may not want them, but we 
struggle to let go.
How did the Chida do this? How could he generate such strong 
resolve to never return to a habit so entrenched and do so all of a 
sudden?
The secret is in his own very words. “To have troubled an en
tire household, to have woken children and servants, all because I 
couldn’t go one night without a pinch of snuff? How could I?” He 
realized that his behavior didn’t exist in a vacuum. His habit did 
not just affect himself and himself alone. And when he took this to 
heart, he knew that he could not conduct himself in a way that hurt 
others.
That is what changed it all for him.
In your own life, as you look out at the habitual challenges 
facing you, think back to the Chida and ask yourself: who is my 
life affecting? If I continue to do this or act like that, who I am im
pacting? My spouse? My children? My friends? When you come to 
terms with this truth, you begin to realize that you must rid your
35
Tishrei Companion 5786
self of unwanted behavior because you care too much about hurt
ing or even losing your family or those around you. You can’t bring 
yourself to hurt your son or your daughter or your spouse or your 
mother or your father.
The Chida was someone who demonstrated that if we can over
come something just once, we can prove to ourselves that we are 
stronger than we believed. 
So whether it’s in gashmiyus or ruchniyus, let us take that first 
step and let us break that habit. And let’s become the best version 
of ourselves.
For now and forever. 
Watch this video on TorahAnytime:
Scan the QR code with a phone 
camera or enter this link online:
MyTAT.me/v136109
Listen to this audio on the TorahAnytime hotline: 
USA 718-298-2077 
Israel 072-398-2980 
UK 0330-1170305 
Canada 647-797-0056
Then dial extension 9136109#
Rabbi Joey Haber
Never Forget This
Every person is fit to be righteous like Moshe Rabbeinu (Rambam 
Hilchos Teshuva 5:2)
It happened on President’s Day, right before my father had his 
cardiac arrest. I remember visiting him at home, as he hadn’t 
been feeling well, and noticing how he was visibly weaker.
I had just come out of his room and was standing in the kitchen, 
speaking with my mother. We were chatting, talking about some
thing going on in the community. Maybe it was about what the lo
cal rabbi was doing for the community. It was something positive, 
something nice. Ten feet away, my father was lying in his room.
Suddenly, I heard him call out: “Joey!” I walked in, and he 
looked at me seriously. “Joey, come here.”
Now, my father was not a pep-talk kind of man, and he wasn’t 
the type to give dramatic locker-room speeches. He was always 
calm, even keeled and steady. But this moment was different. It was 
the only time I can ever remember him speaking like this.
He looked me in the eye and said, “Joey, you listen to me. Don’t 
you ever think that anybody is better than you. I don’t care how 
36
Tishrei Companion 5786
much fanfare they have and I don’t care how much noise they 
make. Don’t you ever believe that anybody is better than you.”
I was shaken. Not because he was loud or angry, but because 
this was so unlike him. It came from such a deep place within. I 
walked back into the kitchen and looked at my mother. “What did 
Daddy want?” I just stood there for a second, trying to process it. 
“You had to hear what he just told me.”
You know why my father said that? Because that’s how he lived 
his entire life. My father never thought anyone was better than him. 
And it wasn’t ego; it was confidence. He lived his life with quiet, 
unshakable confidence. And because of that, he was truly humble. 
He didn’t need recognition and it didn’t matter if anyone knew 
what he did. He didn’t live for the noise.
When you live like that, when you’re grounded in who you are, 
in who your Father in Heaven is, you don’t sway with the wind. 
You’re not pulled this way and that by every headline, every rumor, 
every emotion.
Most of us blow like the wind. Something good happens in the 
news, and we get excited and then something sad happens, and we 
spiral. We hear about someone else’s success, and we grow jealous. 
We hear a problem, and we sink into fear. We become flip-flopping, 
reactionary people.
But when you’re anchored—when you’re secure in your mis
sion, in your values, and in your Creator—you live. Really live. Ev
ery day has purpose, and every result, every setback, every win, 
every step, every attempt is infused with meaning, strength and 
confidence.
So take a moment and ask yourself: do I think about what I’m 
doing? Am I confident that it’s the right thing?
If you are, that’s all you need. You don’t need validation, you 
don’t need headlines, you don’t even need to know what’s happen
ing in the rest of the world.
That’s how my father lived, and that’s what he gave me in that 
moment. 
I’ll never forget it. 
Watch this video on TorahAnytime:
Scan the QR code with a phone 
camera or enter this link online:
MyTAT.me/v322630
Listen to this audio on the TorahAnytime hotline: 
USA 718-298-2077 
Israel 072-398-2980 
UK 0330-1170305 
Canada 647-797-0056
Then dial extension 9322630#
37
Tishrei Companion 5786
Rabbi David Ozeirey
The Little Girl in Belgium 
Though my father and mother have forsaken me, Hashem will gather me 
in (L’Dovid Hashem Ori; Tehillim 27:10)
The Gemara (Sanhedrin 63b) describes how Eliyahu HaNavi 
was once walking through the streets of Yerushalayim. It was 
a time of famine with effects so severe that people were suf
fering from swollen, distended stomachs, the final stages of starva
tion. The sight was devastating.
As Eliyahu HaNavi walked, he came upon a young boy lying in 
a garbage heap. The boy was weak, his belly bloated from hunger. 
He couldn’t move and he had no strength. Eliyahu approached him 
and asked, “What is your name?” The boy told him. “And who is 
your family?” “There is no one left,” the boy replied. “I am the last. 
I am completely alone.” “If I teach you something that will save 
your life,” Eliyahu HaNavi said to the boy, “will you do it?” The 
boy agreed.
Eliyahu HaNavi then taught him familiar words. Words that 
you and I both know. Shema Yisrael Hashem Elokeinu Hashem Echad. 
Now, if we would pause the story here, we might assume that 
the boy recited this simple Pasuk, this age-old declaration of faith 
in G-d.
But sadly, the Gemara does not say that.
“G-d forbid that I should mention the name of G-d!” said the 
boy. In fact, says the Gemara, the boy pulled out an idol, hugged it, 
and kissed it. And at that moment, his stomach split open, he col
lapsed, and the very idol he adored and professed his love for fell 
on top of him. He died just as the verse foretells: “V’natati et pigre
ichem al pigrei giluleichem—I will cast their corpses upon the corpses 
of their idols” (Vayikra 26:30).
It’s a harrowing story.
A child is visited by Eliyahu HaNavi and offered a second 
chance at life by reciting the simple words of Shema Yisrael. And 
yet, he refuses, and winds up dying alone, holding an idol, in a 
heap of garbage.
38
Tishrei Companion 5786
That’s the end of the story.
But there’s another story. I heard it years ago from Rabbi 
Ephraim Wachsman shlita and it has never left me. Allow me to 
compare it to this above Gemara.
He told of a woman named Mrs. Miriam Zupnik, known af
ter the war as “The Angel of Auschwitz.” She risked her life in the 
camps to save Jewish women and children, unafraid of the Nazis. 
After liberation, many Jewish children who had been hidden in 
Christian monasteries remained there. That is when Mrs. Zupnik 
got to work, beginning to rescue them and bring them to a Jew
ish orphanage in Belgium. And every night, she would personally 
put the young girls to bed. These were orphans, many of whom 
were traumatized, and most of whom were alone in the world. She 
would bathe them, feed them and tell them stories. And then she’d 
give each one a hug and whisper: “Say Shema Yisrael.”
There was one girl who received all the love and care like the 
others, but each night, when Mrs. Zupnik asked her to say Shema, 
the girl would instead pull out a cross from her time in the monas
tery, kiss it, and go to sleep. Night after night, week after week, she 
refused to say Shema.
Until one night.
The girl looked up at Mrs. Zupnik and said, “This… this isn’t 
G-d. Is it?” Mrs. Zupnik gently replied, “No, sweetheart. It’s not.”
The girl then took the cross, threw it under her bed, and for the very
f
irst time in her life, said Shema Yisrael.
Now here’s the question. Eliyahu HaNavi couldn’t get a child 
to say Shema, but Mrs. Zupnik could. How could that be? How is it 
possible that Eliyahu HaNavi, the prophet of fire, the messenger of 
redemption, couldn’t do what a Jewish woman from Belgium did 
in the aftermath of the Holocaust?
The answer is as clear as it is painful.
Eliyahu found a child lying in the garbage, starving, alone, un
loved. Under such dire, ravaging conditions, even Eliyahu HaNavi 
couldn’t save him. But Mrs. Zupnik found a child who, though bro
ken, was given love. She was given a bed; she was given warmth; 
she was given kindness, hugs, human dignity, and hope. In that en
vironment, a child can throw away her idol. In that setting, a child 
can say Shema Yisrael for the first time.
39
Tishrei Companion 5786
That is the power of love. That is the power of chizuk, of encour
agement, of care. That is the power of a motherly or fatherly figure 
who believes in a child and surrounds her with dignity and light. 
And that is why we must never give up on our children.
Never give up on the boy who can’t sit still, or the student who 
struggles in class, or the one who seems to be pushing everything 
and everyone away. We all went through school and we all knew 
boys or girls who were labeled as unlikely to succeed. And today, 
many of them are outstanding talmidei chachamim, morahs, bnei To
rah, mothers, fathers, teachers.
Why? Because someone believed in them. Because somewhere 
along the way, there was a rebbe or morah who saw beneath the 
struggle and who didn’t give up, but instead, offered a hand, a 
word, a smile, a second chance. To those rabbeim, to those parents, 
to those mentors, no eye can fathom the reward that awaits them. 
Only Hashem can.
So let us remember. Our greatest tool isn’t always brilliance or 
authority. Sometimes, our greatest tool is warmth. Because even 
when Eliyahu HaNavi couldn’t save a soul, a Jewish woman with 
an open heart could.
And so can we.
Watch this video on TorahAnytime:
Scan the QR code with a phone 
camera or enter this link online:
MyTAT.me/v334713
Listen to this audio on the TorahAnytime hotline: 
USA 718-298-2077 
Israel 072-398-2980 
UK 0330-1170305 
Canada 647-797-0056
Then dial extension 9334713#
Rabbi Asher Weiss
When Poor is Rich
The Merciful One Who answers the poor, may He answer us (Selichos)
As we recite the Selichos each morning, one question looms 
large. What is the most powerful section of all? Which para
graph carries the greatest weight before the Kisei HaKavod 
(Hashem’s Throne of Glory)?
Undoubtedly, the most potent is the Yud Gimmel Middos Shel 
Rachamim, the Thirteen Attributes of Mercy. These words were 
taught to Moshe Rabbeinu by Hashem himself, with Hashem de
40
Tishrei Companion 5786
claring: “Whenever the Jewish people say these words before Me, I 
will forgive them” (Rosh Hashanah 17b).
The second most powerful section is, in my opinion, “Mi 
She’ana—He Who answered…” This refrain is rooted in a Mishnah 
(Ta’anis 15a). It is ancient, authoritative and timeless. Each morning, 
we recite: “He who answered Avraham, Yitzchak, and Yaakov, may 
He answer us.”
But let us pause for a moment.
Do we really believe that we belong in the same breath as 
these giants? Avraham Avinu, who stood alone against the world; 
Yitzchak, who offered himself upon the Mizbeach; Moshe Rabbe
inu, the man who spoke face to face with Hashem; Shmuel HaNa
vi, Aharon HaKohen, Dovid HaMelech, Shlomo HaMelech. These 
are the spiritual architects of our faith. And we ask Hashem: “You 
answered them; answer us.” Who are we to make such a request?
And then comes the final crescendo: “He who answered all the 
righteous, the pious, the pure, and the upright, may He answer us.” 
One must ask: do you really consider yourself a tzaddik? A chassid? 
A tamim? A yashar? Is that where you place yourself? It sounds ab
surd, if not arrogant.
So what are we doing?
If we notice, in the very next section of Selichos, everything 
changes. Without warning, we switch languages. We move from 
Hebrew into Aramaic: “Rachmana de’anei le’aniyei aneinu—The Mer
ciful One who answers the poor, answer us.”
Why the sudden switch?
The Gemara (Berachos 3a; Sotah 33a; as explained by Tosafos), 
teaches that the angels do not understand Aramaic. When we want 
to speak to Hakadosh Baruch Hu in the most intimate, direct, and 
private way, bypassing even the angels, we speak in Aramaic. That 
is why Kaddish, the rawest cry of the orphan, is in Aramaic. It is a 
language of the soul, a language without interference.
This shift is deliberate. We say to the Ribono Shel Olam: we only 
mentioned the names of the Avos, the Neviim, and the tzaddikim to 
invoke the zechus Avos (merit of our Forefathers). But we know who 
we are. We are not delusional and we are not arrogant. All we have 
to offer is the cry of a broken pauper.
Dovid Hamelech writes, “Tefillah l’ani ki ya’atof v’lifnei Hashem 
41
Tishrei Companion 5786
yishpoch sicho—A prayer for a poor man when he enwraps himself 
and pours out his speech before Hashem” (Tehillim 102:1). The Zo
har HaKadosh makes a stunning observation. Of all the 150 chap
ters of Tehillim, only three are labeled Tefillah, a personal prayer: 
Tefillah L’Moshe, the prayer of Moshe, rooted in Torah; Tefillah 
L’Dovid, the prayer of Dovid, the master of tefillah and song; Tefillah 
L’Ani, the cry of the pauper. And, says the Zohar, the greatest of 
them all is Tefillah L’Ani. Why? Because nothing pierces the heav
ens like a broken heart. As another Pasuk in Tehillim (34:18) makes 
clear: “Hashem is close to the broken-hearted, and He saves those 
who are crushed in spirit.”
After reading the magnificent list of holy giants, we say to the 
Ribono Shel Olam: we know we don’t belong on that list. We are 
simply poor. We are spiritually impoverished, broken and frail. But 
we are Your children, and we cry out to You.
So we say: “Rachmana de’anei le’aniyei aneinu… Merciful One 
who answers the poor, answer us.”
That is all we have. That is all we can offer. And we believe it is 
enough.
So when you say Mi She’ana, remember what it means and re
member where it begins and ends. It ends not with pride, but with 
a plea. It ends with Aramaic, because it is too raw, too personal, too 
honest for any angel to carry. 
It is just you and Hashem. A child whispering to their Father, 
“Please, Abba… answer me.”
Watch this video on TorahAnytime:
Scan the QR code with a phone 
camera or enter this link online:
MyTAT.me/v324794
Listen to this audio on the TorahAnytime hotline: 
USA 718-298-2077 
Israel 072-398-2980 
UK 0330-1170305 
Canada 647-797-0056
Then dial extension 9324794#
Rabbi Doniel Staum
With You Is Forgiveness
“For with You is forgiveness, so that You may be feared” (Tehillim 130:4)
Each day between Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur, we recite 
the verse from Tehillim: “For with You is forgiveness, so that 
You may be feared” (Tehillim 130:4).
At first glance, this verse seems puzzling. If Hashem is forgiv
42
Tishrei Companion 5786
ing, why would that inspire fear? On the contrary, forgiveness 
would seem to lessen our fear. If we can always do teshuvah, why 
tremble?
Let me share a story.
A number of years ago, I had a car that could best be described 
as functional, faithful, and a bit, let’s say… character-rich. One Sun
day morning, I walked outside to discover that someone had hit the 
car overnight and left a sizeable dent on the side.
Now, you would have thought I was the biggest tzaddik in the 
world because I didn’t get angry. In fact, I think I even said, “Gam 
zu l’tovah!” What a guy, accepting the judgment of Heaven with 
such equanimity!
But if I’m being honest... part of the reason I stayed so calm is 
because the new dent actually made the car look better. There was 
already a dent on the other side, and this new one gave the car a 
nice, symmetrical look. I didn’t feel any worse because, frankly, I 
thought, “It’s already messed up; what difference does it make?”
That’s how people often feel about themselves. “I’ve already 
made so many mistakes. I’m dented, I’m damaged. What’s the 
point of fixing it now? I’m too far gone.”
But that’s exactly what the Pasuk is coming to challenge.
“Because with You there is forgiveness; and therefore, we 
should be in awe.” Why? Because the fact that forgiveness is possi
ble means we’re not doomed. We can fix it.
And that possibility should awaken a sense of urgency. A 
healthy fear, not of punishment, but of wasted opportunity. If I’m 
still salvageable, if I can change, if Hashem still believes in me, then 
I must not let that chance slip away. As Reb Nachman of Breslov 
said eloquently, “If you believe you can destroy, then believe you 
can repair.”
We all know how easy it is to mess up. The question, though, is 
whether we really believe in our ability to change.
This is what R’ Akiva meant when he cried out: “Praiseworthy 
are you, Israel! Before Whom are you purified? Before your Father 
in Heaven” (Yoma 86b). Hashem is not a distant judge, but a loving 
Father who wants our success. He’s not waiting to punish us; He’s 
waiting for us to come home. We may feel dented, bent, even bro
ken, but we are never beyond repair.
43
Tishrei Companion 5786
So as we stand in these final days before Yom Kippur, let that 
verse echo in our hearts: “Because with You is forgiveness…” That 
is exactly why we should be afraid. Not afraid of failure, but afraid 
of not trying. Afraid that maybe, just maybe, we’re not reaching 
high enough when the gates of Heaven are open before us.
May Hashem grant us all the strength to believe in our ability 
to return.
Watch this video on TorahAnytime:
Scan the QR code with a phone 
camera or enter this link online:
MyTAT.me/v21678
Listen to this audio on the TorahAnytime hotline: 
USA 718-298-2077 
Israel 072-398-2980 
UK 0330-1170305 
Canada 647-797-0056
Then dial extension 921678#
Rabbi Mashiach Kelaty
The Garbage Man and Brain Surgeon
For My thoughts are not your thoughts, nor your ways, My ways 
(Yeshaya 55:8; see Rambam Hilchos Teshuva 5:5)
One morning, I was having a quiet moment over a cup of 
coffee when a thought struck me. It was an idea that feels 
particularly relevant as we approach Yom Kippur and the 
awesome weight of Divine judgment.
Imagine this. You’re at home and the doorbell rings. Curious, 
you glance out the window and see a rubbish truck parked outside. 
Naturally, you assume it’s the garbage collection crew. But when 
you open the door, you’re surprised to see a man standing there 
dressed not in overalls, but in a surgeon’s scrubs.
He greets you cheerfully. “Alright, mate, I’ve come to collect the 
rubbish. Where are your bins?” You stare at him, puzzled. “Aren’t 
you… a doctor?” He nods. “I used to be a brain surgeon, but I fan
cied a career change. Thought this might be a better fit.”
You’re bemused, but polite. You point out the bins, apologize 
for forgetting to take them out earlier, and wish him well in his new 
line of work. Off he goes, and you’re left scratching your head.
Now flip the story.
Imagine someone is about to undergo brain surgery. He’s 
wheeled into the operating room and told he’ll soon meet the high
ly qualified neurosurgeon who will perform the procedure. The 
door opens… and in walks a man dressed like a garbage collector.
Understandably alarmed, the patient asks, “Excuse me, where’s 
44
Tishrei Companion 5786
the surgeon?” The man replies confidently, “That’s me. I used to 
collect rubbish, but I’ve decided to try my hand at brain surgery. I 
f
igured it might be more fulfilling.”
At this point, no one would blame the patient for panicking. A 
rubbish collector attempting neurosurgery? That’s not his job. He’s 
in the wrong role.
And then it hit me. Isn’t that exactly what we sometimes do?
We find ourselves in situations where we don’t have the full 
picture, yet we’re quick to judge. Someone does something, says 
something, and immediately we form conclusions, pass verdicts, 
and even voice them out loud. We become judge, jury, and execu
tioner.
But judgment is not our job.
We weren’t trained for it. We haven’t been given the tools, the 
clarity, or the understanding required to see the full picture. That 
role belongs to Hakadosh Baruch Hu, the only true Judge. He judg
es even the judges. He sees what no human can see: the context, the 
pain, the intention, the emotion.
When we insert ourselves into judgments of people or between 
people, and we say, “He’s right” or, “He’s wrong,” we’re stepping 
into a role for which we are unqualified. We’re the binman walking 
into brain surgery. 
So what should we do?
We should daven. When confusion reigns, when arguments 
f
lare, when we feel pulled to take sides, we must pray for peace. 
Daven for unity. Daven that Hakadosh Baruch Hu, the only One 
who truly knows, should bring clarity and blessing to all. We must 
resist the temptation to be “hoycha fensters,” a Yiddish expression 
for those who think they see everything from their high perch and 
know it all. We must walk humbly with G-d, as the Pasuk says, 
“Hatznea lechet im Hashem Elokecha—Walk humbly with Hashem, 
your G-d” (Micha 6:8).
May we all be zocheh to a year where we let Hashem be the 
Judge, and we, His beloved children, walk with Him and our fellow 
Jews in love and care.
Watch this video on TorahAnytime:
Scan the QR code with a phone 
camera or enter this link online:
MyTAT.me/v125485
Listen to this audio on the TorahAnytime hotline: 
USA 718-298-2077 
Israel 072-398-2980 
UK 0330-1170305 
Canada 647-797-0056
Then dial extension 9125485#
45
Tishrei Companion 5786
YOM KIPPUR
Rabbi YY Jacobson
With the Transgressors 
“With the consent of G-d, and with the consent of the congregation…” 
(Kol Nidrei Prayer)
Every year, as the holiest night of the Jewish calendar begins, 
the chazan (cantor) ascends the bima and opens Yom Kippur 
not with a plea, not with a prayer, but with a legal declara
tion:
“With the consent of G-d, and with the consent of the congregation, 
in the heavenly yeshiva and in the earthly yeshiva, we hereby permit our
selves to pray with the avaryanim, the transgressors.”
What a striking beginning.
We don’t do this any other day of the year. Not on Shabbos, not 
on Rosh Hashanah, not on Mondays or Thursdays when the Torah 
is read. We never pause the service to ask, “Wait, who’s that? That’s 
Clarence Smith… isn’t he the guy with the criminal record?” We 
don’t stop others from praying.
Yet on Yom Kippur, of all days, we make a public announce
ment. Tonight, we give explicit permission to pray with the sinners. 
And this is no casual allowance. We invoke Divine consent. “Al da’as 
haMakom—with the consent of the Almighty.” We likewise invoke 
the collective will of the entire congregation—“Al da’as hakahal.” 
And we call upon both realms—the Yeshiva Shel Maa’lah and the 
Yeshiva Shel Matah—the Heavenly academy and the earthly court.
Why? Who are these avaryanim? Why do we begin the holiest 
night of the year by announcing their inclusion?
Historically, many commentators point to the Marranos—also 
known as the Anusim, the “forced ones”—Jews living in Spain 
during the centuries leading up to the Inquisition. In the 14th and 
15th centuries, Spanish Jews faced overwhelming pressure to con
vert to Christianity. Some resisted, fleeing Spain in exile, whereas 
others, unable to withstand the persecution, outwardly converted 
46
Tishrei Companion 5786
while continuing to practice Judaism in secret. Some abandoned 
Judaism altogether.
When Spain expelled its Jews in 1492 on Tisha B’av, many of 
these crypto-Jews fled to more tolerant lands. Some returned to 
Jewish communities and joined synagogues, enrolling their chil
dren in schools and trying to rebuild the Jewish lives they had lost 
or hidden.
But not everyone welcomed them.
Some said, “This is not fair. We chose exile, we chose poverty, 
we risked everything to keep our faith, and they chose comfort and 
conversion. And now they get to join our communities? Now they 
want aliyos? Now they want to be on the dinner committee?”
It’s an ancient tension. Where were you when we suffered? 
Where were you when we sacrificed? Now you want to return?
The rabbis, however, took a radically different approach. They 
ruled that Yom Kippur must begin with a declaration: “We permit 
ourselves to pray with the transgressors.” Because Yom Kippur is 
not about where you’ve been; it’s about where you’re willing to go.
These transgressors—these Marranos, these estranged Jews, 
these Jews whose external actions betrayed their inner souls—were 
not villains. They were torn, they were pressured, and they were 
confused. But in the depths of their hearts, they were still connect
ed. Perhaps they only showed up one day a year, on Yom Kippur. 
But that one day… was real. That one day, the mask fell. That one 
day, their soul returned. And so, before Kol Nidrei can be chanted, 
before we can nullify our vows and stand trembling before G-d, we 
f
irst open our arms and say: “You too belong here.”
The avaryanim are not just historical. They are alive today. They 
may be the Jews who only come to synagogue once a year or they 
may be the Jews who don’t believe, who’ve been hurt, who feel 
disconnected. They may not know Hebrew and they may not keep 
mitzvos. But something—something—pulls them into shul on Yom 
Kippur. Are they here out of guilt? Out of nostalgia? Out of confu
sion?
Perhaps. But they’re here.
And Kol Nidrei says: That’s enough. Let them in. Let them pray. 
Let them cry. Let them return.
There’s a story of a man who calls his old friend and says, 
47
Tishrei Companion 5786
“Come play golf Saturday morning.” “I can’t,” the friend says. “I 
go to synagogue on Saturdays.” “You?” he laughs. “You’ve never 
stepped foot in a synagogue in 60 years!” “Well,” the friend replies, 
“there’s a man named Cohen who came from Europe with nothing 
and today he’s worth five billion dollars. He attributes all his suc
cess to synagogue.” “So you believe in G-d now?” his friend teases. 
“No,” he says. “Cohen goes to synagogue to talk to G-d. I go to 
synagogue to talk to Cohen.”
It’s a joke, but like all good jokes, it carries a truth. People return 
for all kinds of reasons. But Yom Kippur teaches us: don’t judge 
their motivations. If they’re here, they’re searching. And if they’re 
searching, let them in.
Yom Kippur is the day when the deepest, most hidden parts 
of a person awaken. It’s the day when we are invited to peel away 
layers of habit, shame, and cynicism, and remember who we truly 
are. And so, before we begin, before we rise to sing Kol Nidrei, we 
declare together:
“With the consent of G-d, and with the consent of this holy con
gregation… we give permission to pray with the avaryanim.” Be
cause maybe, just maybe, we’re all avaryanim in our own way. And 
maybe Kol Nidrei isn’t just for them.
It’s for you. It’s for me. It’s for all of us, who come carrying bro
ken vows and broken hearts, and are still brave enough to say: “I’m 
here. I want to come back. Let me pray.”
And together, we will.
Watch this video on TorahAnytime:
Scan the QR code with a phone 
camera or enter this link online:
MyTAT.me/v125538
Listen to this audio on the TorahAnytime hotline: 
USA 718-298-2077 
Israel 072-398-2980 
UK 0330-1170305 
Canada 647-797-0056
Then dial extension 9125538#
Mr. Charlie Harary
Laboratory for the Soul
“There were no good days for the Jewish people like Yom Kippur” 
(Taanis 30b)
One of the most perplexing days on the Jewish calendar is 
Yom Kippur. On one hand, our Sages declare, “There were 
no good days for the Jewish people like Yom Kippur” (Ta
48
Tishrei Companion 5786
anis 30b). There is no festival more exalted, no day more joyous, 
than Yom Kippur. 
Yet, for many of us, Yom Kippur feels more like a day of anxiety 
than joy. Deep down, we anticipate its end more than its arrival. 
Someone once told me that their favorite moment of the entire year 
is biting into a bagel after the fast—and not because of the bagel. 
Because it means that Yom Kippur is the farthest away it will be all 
year.
So which is it? Is Yom Kippur a day of unparalleled joy or one 
of dread and discomfort?
The answer lies in our perception. Yom Kippur has, for many, 
become a somber, even fear-inducing day. We walk into shul as 
though standing before a merciless judge, awaiting our sentence. 
We say words of confession that may not feel authentic. We fast, we 
stand, we daven, and underneath it all, we’re unsettled. It’s hard, 
it’s intense, and we’re afraid.
But what if we’ve misunderstood Yom Kippur entirely?
Imagine for a moment that news broke of a revolutionary scien
tific discovery. A team of the world’s leading researchers has creat
ed a chamber that can reverse the effects of obesity and food-related 
disease. You enter this room, and through the use of gamma rays, 
your body is purified. Fat is melted, toxins are flushed, muscles are 
strengthened, and nutrient levels are restored. It’s painless, mirac
ulous, and completely free, offered as a gift to humanity. How long 
would the line be to get in?
Yom Kippur is that chamber. It is a spiritual laboratory gifted to 
us by G-d once a year. The only difference is that it doesn’t cleanse 
our physical bodies; it purifies our souls.
The world we live in feels physical. You look around a room and 
see tables, chairs and food. But in truth, it’s all congealed spiritual
ity. Hashem infuses each day with divine energy, with a spiritual 
light that sustains the universe. But this light is filtered, measured 
and balanced by justice. Except on one day.
On Yom Kippur, G-d suspends the usual filters. He silences the 
prosecuting forces and opens the highest realms, releasing a flood 
of Divine light unlike any other day. And this light descends not 
based on merit, not as a reward, but as a gift. It is light which holds 
the power to seep into our souls and purify them. The Rambam 
49
Tishrei Companion 5786
(Hilchos Teshuva 1:3; see Yoma 85b, Shavuos 13a) rules that by virtue 
of going through the day of Yom Kippur itself—itzumo shel yom—
one is cleansed of all their sins, so long as they repent. Yom Kippur 
holds such potency that just living through it purifies you. 
So what is the fear of Yom Kippur? It shouldn’t be fear of pun
ishment. It is a day suffused with Hashem’s unmitigated love. 
Rather, the fear is that of wasting this once-in-a-year opportunity. 
It is the fear of walking out of the Divine chamber unchanged.
Sin isn’t just a legal transgression. It’s a barrier between our
selves and our truest identity, between us and our Creator. It dulls 
our senses, numbs our spirit, and creates layers of spiritual fat that 
keep us distant from who we’re meant to be.
And then comes Yom Kippur.
For twenty-five hours, G-d invites us into His sanctuary of 
light. Every moment is an opportunity to unlock part of ourselves. 
Every honest reflection allows the light in and every sincere desire 
to improve brings healing. There is nothing standing between us 
and Hashem. Every time we whisper, “S’lach na—Please forgive,” 
He responds, “Salachti kidvarecha—I have forgiven you according to 
your words.” 
When we enter Yom Kippur with the understanding that Hash
em is not a harsh judge but a loving Father, we no longer dread 
the day. We cherish it. Of course it’s hard. We fast, we confess, we 
stand for long hours. But all of that is preparation for the real work: 
spiritual transformation. And for that reason, there is no better day 
in the year.
On most holidays, we celebrate with joy, food, and festivity. 
But on Yom Kippur, we don’t just celebrate. We change. 
And so, may we approach Yom Kippur not with dread, but 
with anticipation. And when we break our fast—not because it’s 
over, but because we are new people—may we know, deep within 
our being, that we are different. That we are whole. That we are 
ready to become the people we were always meant to be.
Watch this video on TorahAnytime:
Scan the QR code with a phone 
camera or enter this link online:
MyTAT.me/v92559
Listen to this audio on the TorahAnytime hotline: 
USA 718-298-2077 
Israel 072-398-2980 
UK 0330-1170305 
Canada 647-797-0056
Then dial extension 992559#
50
Tishrei Companion 5786
Rebbetzin Slovie Jungreis-Wolff
Keys to Heaven
Pray now, supplicate for life now, before the one Who dwells on High 
(Yom Kippur Shacharis Prayers)
Let me share three practical steps to help us reawaken our 
kavana (concentration) and fuel our prayers with passion, 
meaning and connection.
Step 1: Let Go of Shame
Don’t let shame block you from praying. Rabbi Nachman of 
Breslov once addressed an important thought that often troubles 
us. Are we worthy of approaching G-d and asking forgiveness or 
pleading with requests? The answer is imperative to remember and 
repeat to yourself if ever you feel the answer is no. “Never allow 
shame to stop you from speaking to G-d,” taught Rav Nachman. 
Even if you sinned, even if you failed, even if you feel distant or 
undeserving, you are never too far gone to pray.
So often we hold ourselves back, wondering, “Who am I to 
speak to Hashem after what I’ve done and said?” But Hashem 
doesn’t reject you. He’s waiting for you, and your tefillah, no matter 
where it comes from, has power.
I’ll never forget when I was a teenager and traveled with my 
mother to Eretz Yisrael. She had been invited to speak at a women’s 
prison in Ramla. The courtyard was made of just concrete and plas
tic chairs, situated under the blazing sun. The women were of all 
ages, sitting with arms folded and hard expressions on their faces, 
unmoved. But by the time my mother finished speaking, the atmo
sphere had shifted. Eyes were moist and faces had softened.
As we were leaving, one young woman approached me. “S’li
cha, excuse me. B’vakasha, please, can I ask you a favor?” She opened 
her palm, revealing a small, folded piece of paper. “All my life,” she 
said, “I’ve lived here in Israel, and I’ve never been to the Kotel. I 
want so badly to pray there, but I can’t. I’m here. Would you please 
take my note to the Kotel?”
I said yes and began to walk away. But then she called out again, 
“S’licha, b’vakasha, one more favor.” She looked at me, unsure. “I’ve 
51
Tishrei Companion 5786
never prayed before. Lo hitpalalti me’olam. I don’t even know if this 
is a good prayer. Would you look at it and tell me if it’s okay?”
I unfolded the note. Three simple words. Three perfect words.
“Elokim, s’lach li—God, forgive me.”
It was one of the sincerest prayers I had ever seen.
Never allow shame to separate you from tefillah. If you have 
even the smallest desire to connect to Hashem, that alone makes 
your prayer infinitely precious.
Step 2: Do the Spiritual Cardio
Prayer requires effort and takes spiritual muscle. We can’t just 
rush through the words and expect transformation. We need to put 
our heart into it and focus as best as we can. 
The prophet Yeshayahu warns against empty prayer: “This na
tion honors Me with their lips, but their hearts are far from Me...” 
(Yeshayah 29:13). It’s easy to recite blessings and have our mind 
wander aimlessly. But if we’re just going through the motions and 
praying by rote, it’s as if our words have no wings. If you find your
self consistently distracted, ask yourself what small change might 
help. Maybe it’s where you sit in shul or maybe it’s turning away 
from the window, moving away from chatter, or during the week, 
simply setting your phone aside. These small adjustments can cre
ate a big shift.
Step 3: Find Your Words
Not every word in the siddur will ignite you, and that’s okay. 
But some words will, and when they do, hold onto them. Someone 
once asked me, “What’s your favorite tefillah?” For me, it’s a Pasuk 
we say every single morning: “He is the Healer of broken hearts, 
the One who binds their wounds” (Tehillim 147:3). The next line 
says: “He counts the stars and calls each one by name.”
After my father passed away, this prayer spoke directly to my 
neshama. My mother pointed it out to me one morning. “Hashem is 
your Healer. And if He counts every star by name, don’t you think 
He sees you, knows your name and knows your pain?” Ever since, 
I’ve highlighted that verse in my siddur. And every time I come to 
it, I pause.
You can do the same. Find the lines that speak to your heart, 
highlight them and let them anchor you.
The Arizal teaches that whenever you pray with kavana, you 
52
Tishrei Companion 5786
give wings to your tefillos and help them ascend to Heaven. But 
what about the days when you don’t feel it? What happens when 
you say the words but they feel flat or when your mind is else
where?
The Arizal says: those prayers are waiting. They wait until the 
day when you do pray with passion and when your heart opens. 
On that day, those earlier prayers—those empty-seeming ones—
catch a ride on the wings of your current tefillah and they soar up
ward together.
Why? Because Hashem sees your effort. He knows how hard it 
is to show up when you’re not inspired, and He cherishes the fact 
that you tried.
No prayer goes to waste. Every single tefillah has an address. 
Always remember that.
Watch this video on TorahAnytime:
Scan the QR code with a phone 
camera or enter this link online:
MyTAT.me/v206020
Listen to this audio on the TorahAnytime hotline: 
USA 718-298-2077 
Israel 072-398-2980 
UK 0330-1170305 
Canada 647-797-0056
Then dial extension 9206020#
Rabbi Mordechai Kalatsky
My Living Torah Scrolls
May G-d remember the soul of… (Yizkor Prayer)
Volvi had served as the gabbai in the Claremont Shul in Cape 
Town, South Africa for years. Even in his eighties, when he 
was frail, every year before the Yamim Noraim, he insisted 
on doing the same job: changing the coverings of the Sifrei Torah 
(Torah scrolls) to white.
The shul had many old Torah scrolls, some of them quite heavy 
and large, and people repeatedly offered to help. But Volvi always 
insisted that he do it himself. Even when the Rav approached, of
fering assistance, still, the answer was no.
Finally, the Rav asked, “Volvi, why won’t you let anyone help? 
Why is this so personal?”
Volvi paused. Then he looked at the Rav and said:
“I grew up in Baranovich, and I had ten siblings and we were 
very poor. Once a year, before the Yamim Noraim, we each got 
53
Tishrei Companion 5786
something white. A white shirt, a white skirt, a white tichel. That 
was our present. It was a moment of joy in a hard life.
Then the Nazis came. They took my whole family. I am the only 
one who survived.
You see those twelve Sifrei Torah? That one is Rivka. That one 
is Yankel. That one is Yisrael. That one is Yitzchak. That’s Sarah. 
That’s my mother and father. I’m not changing Torah covers. I’m 
dressing my family for Yom Tov. Please, don’t take that away from 
me.”
On Yom Kippur, we recite Yizkor. The word isn’t zachor, to re
member in the past. It’s yizkor, to remember for the future. It’s a 
promise that we’ll keep our loved one’s legacy alive. And that’s be
cause we don’t simply mourn our ancestors; we perpetuate them. 
We don’t just cry for those we lost; we become like them. We say, 
“You lived for something and you sacrificed for something. Now I 
will carry that forward.”
A cemetery is known by three names: Beis Ha’kvaros, a place of 
burial; Beis Olamim, a place of eternity; Beis HaChaim, a place of life. 
Why three?
Because there are three types of people:
Some lived only for material things. When they pass, they are 
simply buried in a Beis Ha’kvaros. All they have is the space in which 
their buried body occupies. Some, however, lived spiritual lives, yet 
disconnected from the larger community. They grew spiritually, 
but they did so alone. Now and forever, their Torah remains with 
them in their eternal abode, their Beis Olamim. But some lived their 
lives for Klal Yisrael. They lived for their families, for their commu
nities, and for the growth of others. They gave warmth, light, and 
strength. Those are in the Beis HaChaim. Those people live on in the 
lives of those who are still on earth.
Years ago, an elderly man told me something I never forgot. 
“Do you know your mission as a rabbi?” he asked. I thought I did. 
He then said something that resonated profoundly. “Your mission 
is to be a beacon of light for every person, at every moment, in ev
ery place, no matter how you’re doing.”
The Chofetz Chaim writes that every Jew must be like the sun. 
The sun gives light and warmth, and it helps things grow. That is 
our job: to shine, to comfort, and to cultivate growth.
54
Tishrei Companion 5786
As Yom Kippur approaches, ask yourself: who can I bring light 
to this year? Whose legacy can I carry forward? Who needs warmth 
in a cold world?
One time, a woman came to Rabbi Lawrence Kelemen and told 
him, “I’m never having children.” “Why not?” he asked. “Because 
the world is too dark. How can I bring a child into such a dark 
world?” He paused, and told her this story:
“I had a friend who dreamed of becoming an emergency room 
doctor at Yale. At 14, he began studying intensely. At 16, he got a 
perfect SAT score. He went to Harvard, then to Stanford Medical 
School, and then endured grueling years of internships and resi
dency.
“Finally, at 36, he was accepted to Yale Medical Center as an ER 
doctor. His life’s dream.
“As he stood at the doors of the emergency room, someone tried 
to stop him. ‘Don’t go in there! There’s death, there’s pain. Gunshot 
wounds. Trauma. Don’t do it; it’s too dark!’ And he looked at them 
and said, ‘I’ve been preparing my whole life for this exact place.’
“And then he walked in, and began healing people.
“Yes, the world is dark,” concluded Rabbi Kelemen. “But if you 
bring a child into the world to be its light, there’s no better accom
plishment. If you live your life not to avoid darkness, but to bring 
light into it, there has never been a greater mission.”
So bring that light.
When you’re anxious, pray for someone else’s peace of mind. 
When you’re overwhelmed, smile at someone else. When you feel 
pain, turn it into tefillah for others.
This is what our people did after the Holocaust. They rebuilt. 
They didn’t just remember; they perpetuated. And that’s our mis
sion now.
If we live with that light, Hashem will surely look at us and say: 
“You are someone I need in My world.”
Watch this video on TorahAnytime:
Scan the QR code with a phone 
camera or enter this link online:
MyTAT.me/v326776
Listen to this audio on the TorahAnytime hotline: 
USA 718-298-2077 
Israel 072-398-2980 
UK 0330-1170305 
Canada 647-797-0056
Then dial extension 9326776#
55
Tishrei Companion 5786
Rabbi Berel Wein zt”l
In the Shadow of Thy Hand
May He conceal us in the shelter of His hand, beneath the wings of the 
Divine Presence (Neilah Prayers)
One of the central features of Neilah is the repetition of Se
lichos. Thirteen times, we recite the Yud Gimmel Middos 
HaRachamim, the Thirteen Attributes of Divine Mercy. 
These Thirteen Attributes form the foundation of our relationship 
with G-d. And on Yom Kippur, during Neilah, we repeat them 
again and again.
There is a certain mystical significance to the number thirteen in 
Judaism. We find thirteen principles of Torah exegesis, and if you 
include Menashe and Ephraim as separate tribes while returning 
Levi to the count, you also arrive at thirteen tribes. In the secular 
world, contrastingly, thirteen is often viewed superstitiously, even 
negatively. But in Torah, it represents mercy and spiritual maturity. 
Moreover, before each of the thirteen repetitions, we recite 
thirteen short introductory prayers. Some are borrowed from ear
lier Selichos, while others are unique to Neilah. Across the Jewish 
world—Sefardic, Yemenite, Ashkenazi—there are different cus
toms regarding the exact texts of these prayers. Most were com
posed between the 6th and 16th centuries, during a millennium of 
exile, suffering, endurance, and Torah development.
Among the Ashkenazi customs, some of these piyutim (liturgi
cal poems) are, in my opinion, among the most moving ever writ
ten. The title of my book on Neilah is drawn from one such piyut: In 
the Shadow of Thy Hand. Its imagery is powerful. It envisions G-d’s 
hand hovering over us, shielding us, hiding us in His shadow, pro
tecting us on the Day of Judgment. Like a child hiding behind his 
mother, we instinctively seek shelter in times of fear. And so, too, 
we ask: “Hide us, G-d. Conceal us beneath the shadow of Your 
hand.”
That description always reminded me of a Jew I once knew in 
Miami Beach: Isidor Wolf. I met him when he was already 96 years 
old, though he lived to well over 100 and was a member of my shul. 
56
Tishrei Companion 5786
He was a Lithuanian Jew, born in Kovno, who came to America 
alone at age fifteen without parents and without relatives and be
came a multimillionaire. He owned parking garages in New York, 
starting as far back as the 1910s and 1920s.
He was one of those old-school Litvaks—sharp, shrewd, wise—
and I would visit him from time to time. One Purim, I brought him 
mishloach manos, and he said, “Sit down.” When a multimillionaire 
tells you to sit down, you sit.
“You want to know,” he said, “why I’ve lived so long?” “Mr. 
Wolf,” I replied, “may G-d bless you with many more years.” “I’m 
not asking for a blessing,” he said. “I’m telling you. You want to 
know why?”
He related that he lost both of his parents when he was just 
eleven, and he was left with no one. For a few months, he lived on 
the streets of Kovno. But in Kovno, there was a Mussar Kloiz, a small 
group of disciples of Rabbi Yisrael Salanter, headed by none other 
than Rav Yitzchok Blazer, known as Reb Itzele Peterburger. He lat
er made aliyah to Jerusalem, where he is buried on Har HaZeitim, 
Mount Olives.
One day, one of the baalei mussar noticed the boy. He found out 
that Isidor had nowhere to go, and so they took him in. They made 
a bed for him on a bench in the women’s section of the beis medrash, 
fed him, taught him Torah, and even gave him violin lessons. 
By age fifteen, realizing there was no future for him in Kovno, 
he scraped together enough money to buy a ticket to America. But 
on his last Yom Kippur in Kovno, he was with the baalei mussar. 
That’s where he belonged, as they had adopted him and they loved 
him.
When the fast ended, they didn’t rush home. Before Ma’ariv, 
they danced. Thirty men, weak from fasting though spiritually el
evated, danced and sang for half an hour. They couldn’t let Yom 
Kippur go. What did they sing?
The piyut, “Yachb’ienu b’tzeil yadecha tachas kanfei haShechinah—
Hide us, G-d, in the shadow of Your hand, beneath the wings of the 
Divine Presence.”
And then Mr. Wolf told me something I’ll never forget.
“I was standing next to Reb Itzele Peterburger. He held my hand 
in his right hand, and I was holding someone else’s in my left. I was 
57
Tishrei Companion 5786
just a kid, a teenager, and I danced wildly. And I still can’t believe 
it, but at one point, I accidentally kicked Reb Itzele!”
He paused and smiled. “Reb Itzele leaned down to me and 
whispered, in Yiddish, ‘Mein yingele, my beloved child, ‘Keep danc
ing. May you live a long life. Just... don’t kick anymore.’”
And then Mr. Wolf looked at me and said, “That’s it. He gave 
me a blessing. And Heaven had to listen.”
That story has stayed with me all my life.
Every Yom Kippur, I remember that moment and those rever
berating words: “Yachb’ienu b’tzeil yadecha tachas kanfei haShechi
nah—Hide us beneath the shadow of Your hand.” Neilah is filled 
with that longing. 
Such a prayer does not come in a vacuum. We likewise state 
in Neilah: “Atah hiv’dalta enosh mireishis—You, G-d, separated man 
from the beginning.” G-d has made us different from the rest of 
creation. We are not animals, and we were given a soul, a mission, a 
moral compass, dominion over the world. And yet, we look around 
and ask: have we done such a great job? Mah chayeinu? Mah chas
deinu? Mah tzidkaseinu? What is our life? What is our kindness? 
What is our righteousness? On our own, we are nothing.
And yet, we turn to Hashem and say, “You chose us and You 
elevated us. You gave us the Torah and the capacity for good. You 
gave us a vision that extends beyond the grave.” And so, before the 
gates close, we come to You—one more time.
And there, amidst the waning hours of dusk as we whisper our 
f
inal prayers up to Heaven… we ask to be hidden, to be protected, 
to be remembered. To be with our Father, in long life, for many 
years to come. 
Watch this video on TorahAnytime:
Scan the QR code with a phone 
camera or enter this link online:
MyTAT.me/v246956
Listen to this audio on the TorahAnytime hotline: 
USA 718-298-2077 
Israel 072-398-2980 
UK 0330-1170305 
Canada 647-797-0056
Then dial extension 9246956#
SUKKOT
Rabbi Aryeh Kerzner
The Esrog of Transformation 
58
Tishrei Companion 5786
“And you shall take for yourself on the first day the fruit of a citron tree” 
(Vayikra 23:40)
One of the central mitzvos of Sukkos is the taking of the Daled 
Minim, among which the esrog holds a featured role. The 
esrog is not only visually beautiful and aromatic; it is sym
bolically rich. The Beis Ephraim offers a penetrating insight into its 
selection, one that reframes the entire spiritual posture of Sukkos.
We are familiar with the rule “Ein kategor na’aseh sanegor—A 
prosecutor cannot become a defender” (Rosh Hashanah 26a). This 
principle underlies the halacha that the Kohen Gadol on Yom Kip
pur may not wear gold garments while entering the Kodesh HaKo
dashim (Holy of Holies). Since gold was the material used in the sin 
of the Golden Calf, it cannot serve as a symbol of defense when we 
seek atonement from Hashem. That which reminds Hashem of our 
failures cannot become the instrument of our forgiveness.
Yet this rule raises a profound question. If, as many Midrashim 
and Rishonim maintain, the esrog was the fruit of the Eitz HaDaas 
(see Berachos 40a; Sanhedrin 70b; Bereishis Rabbah 15:7; Ramban, Va
yikra 23:40), the very object through which Adam HaRishon intro
duced sin into the world, how can we possibly take that same es
rog in hand on Sukkos as a mitzvah? How can the very symbol of 
the original sin become a source of merit and Divine compassion? 
Should not the esrog be disqualified under the rule of ein kategor 
na’aseh sanegor?
The Beis Ephraim answers with an extraordinary insight. The 
spiritual work of Sukkos is fundamentally different from that of 
Yom Kippur.
During the Aseres Yemei Teshuvah, culminating in Yom Kippur, 
our primary focus is teshuvah me’yirah, repentance motivated by 
awe, reverence and fear. In this mode, we seek to delete our sins, to 
erase the blemishes of the past. We ask Hashem for atonement and 
forgiveness. We attempt to purge our record and our neshama of all 
that stains it. In this framework, we must stay far from the instru
ments of our past failures. We do not invoke symbols of sin in our 
effort to gain forgiveness. Hence, ein kategor na’aseh sanegor.
But Sukkos is different.
The spiritual mode of Sukkos is teshuvah me’ahavah, repentance 
59
Tishrei Companion 5786
born of love. This is not about deletion. This is about transforma
tion.
Teshuvah me’ahavah takes the very aveiros of the past and elevates 
them, refines them, and converts them into merits. The Gemara 
(Yoma 86b) teaches that z’donos na’asos lo ke’zechuyos, intentional sins 
become sources of merit. The same actions that once distanced us 
from Hashem now become part of the journey that draws us close. 
It is not a process of hiding our failures, but of owning them, learn
ing from them, and using them to propel us upward.
And so, on Sukkos, we take the esrog, the very fruit associated 
with the first sin, and we lift it high. We make a beracha over it. We 
draw it close to our hearts. Because on Sukkos, we’re not running 
from our past, but redeeming it. We’re not covering our shame, but 
transforming it. 
On Yom Kippur, we say, “This was part of my sin. Let me dis
tance myself from it.” On Sukkos, we say, “This was once part of 
my sin. Now, it is part of my avodas Hashem.”
That is the avodah of a Jew on Sukkos. It is not merely the joy 
of forgiveness; it is the joy of renewal. It is not just spiritual clean
liness; it is spiritual creativity. On Sukkos, we become artists of the 
neshama, taking the shattered pieces of our failures and turning 
them into a mosaic of meaning and connection.
So yes, we hold the esrog proudly, because it reminds us not 
only of the past, but of what the past can become when it is infused 
with growth. 
And that is the deep message of Sukkos. Not just return, but 
transformation. 
Watch this video on TorahAnytime:
Scan the QR code with a phone 
camera or enter this link online:
MyTAT.me/v208163
Listen to this audio on the TorahAnytime hotline: 
USA 718-298-2077 
Israel 072-398-2980 
UK 0330-1170305 
Canada 647-797-0056
Then dial extension 9208163#
Rabbi Avi Slansky
Faith in a Flimsy Hut
And may you spread upon us the Sukkah of Your peace (Prayer recited 
upon entry to the Sukkah)
60
Tishrei Companion 5786
For many, change is difficult. And when it is unpredicted and 
unexpected, it becomes even more daunting. 
Yet in most situations, we find ways to respond. If some
one loses a job, they update their resume, make calls, and reach out 
for help. If a loved one falls ill, we seek the best doctors, say Tehil
lim, and rally every spiritual and practical support possible. We do 
what we can.
But then there are moments—rare, terrifying moments—when 
our hands are completely tied and there is nothing we can do. And 
in those moments, many falter.
During the Holocaust, in the Krakow Ghetto, there was a strict 
curfew with no one permitted outdoors at night. Months passed 
with no Torah learning, until a group of brave young men couldn’t 
bear the spiritual void. They resolved to meet quietly and secretly 
on the fourth floor of a building to learn by the dim glow of a single 
candle.
They knew the risk, but they craved the spiritual light. And so 
they came. Twenty neshamos, one flickering flame, and pages of a 
sacred text. Hour after hour, they poured their hearts into Torah, 
nourishing their souls in the darkness.
Until they heard it. The sound of boots…screaming…barking 
dogs. 
The Nazis had found them. 
Fear clutched them, all of them freezing in place, their hearts 
pounding. One boy suddenly cried out, “They’re here!” The others 
stared at him in horror. Of course we know they’re here! But they 
said nothing. They held their breath. The soldiers stormed the first 
f
loor, then the second, then the third. The boys began whispering 
Shema Yisrael, expecting the worst.
But then, the footsteps retreated. The guards left. They were 
saved.
Once the coast was clear, Yaakov, the group’s leader, turned 
to the boy who had cried out. His voice was calm, but piercing. 
“You risked your life and you risked all our lives. Don’t you un
derstand? In moments like these, we survive by emunah. And when 
you screamed in fear, you didn’t just break the silence; you broke 
our faith. And that is the greatest danger of all.”
61
Tishrei Companion 5786
As we walk into the Sukkah this year, we may feel surrounded 
by unpredictability. It may not be the Krakow Ghetto and there 
may be no boots, no dogs and no Nazis, but there are other looming 
fears and uncertainties. 
The world feels unstable. There’s illness and there’s disaster, 
and so many of our brothers and sisters remain trapped behind the 
trauma of their past and present. Panic and doubt may clutch us. 
There is wave upon wave of change upon change. And so we ask: 
how do we rejoice?
The answer may lie in the Sukkah itself. It is, by design, tem
porary, flimsy and impermanent. It cannot shield us from the el
ements, and yet, it is the safest place in the world because it is the 
dwelling place of Hashem. It is the Ananei HaKavod, the Clouds of 
Glory. It is His hug, His embrace.
The Sukkah is the only mitzvah in which your entire being is en
veloped. When you eat in it, sleep in it, speak in it, it’s all a mitzvah. 
When we make the blessing Leishev ba’Sukkah, we are declaring: “I 
choose to dwell in emunah. I choose to place myself in Hashem’s 
hands and surrender control.” And that surrender is our greatest 
strength.
Yes, the world is uncertain, and yes, there are things we can
not predict. But when we don’t panic and instead sit with serenity 
inside our Sukkah, we affirm that we are not alone. We are in the 
palace of the King. And in His arms, we are safe.
Watch this video on TorahAnytime:
Scan the QR code with a phone 
camera or enter this link online:
MyTAT.me/v125981
Listen to this audio on the TorahAnytime hotline: 
USA 718-298-2077 
Israel 072-398-2980 
UK 0330-1170305 
Canada 647-797-0056
Then dial extension 9125981#
Rabbi Avi Wiesenfeld
Everyone is Here
Blessed are You, Hashem our G-d… Who commanded us to dwell 
in a Sukkah (Blessing recited in the Sukkah) 
Sukkos is known as Zman Simchaseinu, the season of our joy. 
And nowhere is this joy more vividly expressed than in the 
Simchas Beis HaSho’evah, the nightly celebration that took place 
62
Tishrei Companion 5786
in the Beis Hamikdash during Chol HaMoed Sukkos. The Gemara 
(Sukkah 51a) paints a picture of the unparalleled rejoicing which 
took place: music, dancing, juggling with fire, and spontaneous 
song and celebration. It was such an exalted experience that Chazal 
declared: “Whoever never witnessed the Simchas Beis HaSho’evah 
has never truly seen joy in their life” (ibid.).
Among the remarkable moments of those celebrations is a cryp
tic declaration made by Hillel Ha’Zakein (the Elder): “If I am here, 
everyone is here. But if I am not here, who is here?” (ibid. 53a). At 
f
irst glance, this statement sounds strikingly self-important. Was 
Hillel, the paragon of humility (see Shabbos 31a), claiming that ev
erything revolved around him? Could such a statement truly come 
from the same Hillel who chased away arrogance and ego?
Many commentaries grapple with this, explaining that “Ani,” 
I, refers to Hashem, as if to say, “If Hashem is here, then all are 
here.” While sensible, this isn’t the straightforward reading of the 
Gemara.
The Hafla’ah (R’ Pinchas HaLevi Horowitz, Frankfurt, 18th cen
tury), however, offers an understanding which speaks to each of us, 
especially during this season of joy.
During the Simchas Beis HaSho’evah, or any holy celebration, we 
may feel unworthy. Who am I to dance before Hashem? What have 
I done this year to deserve joy and to stand in the presence of the 
Shechinah and rejoice? It’s a question many of us quietly ask.
Hillel responds to that inner doubt. If I—with all my imper
fections and shortcomings—can be here, dancing before Hashem, 
then everyone can be here. And if I, who feel unworthy, am not 
allowed in, then no one is. Because who among us is truly worthy?
Hillel isn’t speaking from ego; he’s speaking from empathy and 
reminding each of us that we belong. You matter. If your presence 
isn’t valid, then no one’s is. Our worthiness isn’t rooted in perfec
tion. It’s rooted in our sincerity and desire to draw close to Hashem.
David Rockefeller famously never wore a watch because his 
business meetings only began when he arrived. Hillel believed the 
same. When you show up to dance with Hashem, that is when the 
simcha begins.
So many of us go through Yom Tov, especially Sukkos and Sim
chas Torah, unsure if we really are feeling the joy we’re meant to. 
63
Tishrei Companion 5786
Are we just going through the motions? Is this true simcha, or just 
social energy? Hillel teaches us that showing up—with our full 
selves, imperfections and all—is the very essence of Zman Simcha
seinu. If one Jew can dance, then so can we all. 
So let’s just show up and dance and sing. Let us allow ourselves 
to rejoice, not because we are perfect, but because we are present.
Watch this video on TorahAnytime:
Scan the QR code with a phone 
camera or enter this link online:
MyTAT.me/v163203
Listen to this audio on the TorahAnytime hotline: 
USA 718-298-2077 
Israel 072-398-2980 
UK 0330-1170305 
Canada 647-797-0056
Then dial extension 9163203#
Rabbi Binyomin Pruzansky
The Greatest Destination
And you shall rejoice on your festival—you, your son, your 
daughter…:” (Devarim 16:14)
It was Chol HaMoed, and Rabbi Fischel Schachter wanted to take 
his children on an outing. Like many parents, he was looking 
for something fun, but also budget-friendly. So he gathered his 
children, told them to get into the van, and off they went.
“Where are we going, Tatty?” they asked. “You’ll see,” he re
plied. Truthfully, he had no destination in mind. He just started 
driving, hoping inspiration would strike. As they got on the high
way, the kids spotted signs for JFK Airport.
“Are we flying somewhere?” the kids asked. Rabbi Schachter 
smiled. “You’ll see.”
And then it hit him. It was a brilliant idea. They’d go to JFK, ride 
the AirTrain, and watch planes take off and land. A free trip, fun for 
the kids, and light on the wallet.
When they arrived at the airport, he realized he wasn’t the only 
one with this idea. The terminal was packed with families from 
Boro Park, all riding the AirTrain in circles, waving to one another 
and enjoying the adventure.
At one stop, a pilot entered the train. He looked the part: uni
form, suitcase, the whole package. Rabbi Schachter asked one of his 
children to give up their seat so the pilot could sit. The man grate
fully accepted and struck up a conversation.
64
Tishrei Companion 5786
“I see you’re flying with the family,” the pilot said. “Where are 
you headed?” “Oh,” Rabbi Schachter hesitated, “nowhere, real
ly.” The pilot looked puzzled. “No, really, tell me. I know this air
port inside and out. I can help you find the right terminal.” Rabbi 
Schachter smiled. “We’re not going anywhere. It’s Chol HaMoed, 
and this is our trip.” “You’re telling me you’re just riding the Air
Train in circles?” the pilot asked, stunned. “Pretty much,” Rabbi 
Schachter said, laughing. “That’s our outing.” 
The pilot sat back, thinking deeply. Then he turned to Rabbi 
Schachter and said something unforgettable:
“You know, every day I get up and I know exactly where I’m 
going. I know the destination, the flight path, the exact timing. But 
my life? My wife left me and my kids don’t talk to me. So yes, I trav
el the world, but I have no destination. But you—you don’t have a 
destination, and yet you have everything. Watching you with your 
kids, seeing their happiness… that’s the greatest journey there is.”
With that, the pilot stood up, grabbed his suitcase, and walked 
off the train.
Rabbi Schachter later reflected on this telling encounter. We of
ten think joy comes from going somewhere exotic or doing some
thing exciting. But the truth is, the greatest joy isn’t found in a des
tination; it’s found in togetherness. It’s found in being present with 
the people we love and in cherishing the beracha of family.
And that’s the best destination of all. 
Watch this video on TorahAnytime:
Scan the QR code with a phone 
camera or enter this link online:
MyTAT.me/v92912
Listen to this audio on the TorahAnytime hotline: 
USA 718-298-2077 
Israel 072-398-2980 
UK 0330-1170305 
Canada 647-797-0056
Then dial extension 948360#
Rabbi Dovid Goldwasser
From Blue Thread to Blue Ink
“I caused the Children of Israel to dwell in booths” (Vayikra 23:43)—they 
were Clouds of Glory (Sukkah 11b)
According to R’ Eliezer, we are commanded to build a Suk
kah in memory of the Ananei HaKavod, the Clouds of Glo
ry, which enveloped Klal Yisrael in the wilderness (Sukkah 
65
Tishrei Companion 5786
11b). 
The Tzemach Tzaddik, Rabbi Menachem Mendel Hager, posed 
a profound question. Why do we commemorate the Ananei HaKa
vod and not the other miracles? What about the manna, the mirac
ulous bread from Heaven that provided perfect sustenance, or the 
Be’er Miriam, the ever-flowing wellspring that gave us fresh water 
in the desert?
The Tzemach Tzaddik explains that food and water are essen
tial to life. Hashem had to provide them to the Jewish nation. But 
the protective clouds are something we could have survived with
out. We’ve all seen people living without roofs over their heads, 
tragically, but they still survive.
The Ananei HaKavod represent lovingkindness that goes beyond 
necessity. Hashem gave us more than we needed. He didn’t just 
sustain us; He surrounded us with love. That’s why we build Suk
kos. Not to remember our survival, but to remember His love. 
Years ago, I traveled to the former Soviet Union to give a clan
destine shiur (Torah class). Torah learning was illegal, and we had 
to move cautiously. I was passed from contact to contact, each one 
unaware of the final destination. Eventually, we descended into a 
basement, its surroundings damp and dingy, but holy. 
The shiur was unforgettable. The fire in their eyes and the hun
ger for Torah was unlike anything I had seen.
At precisely 10:00 p.m., I stood to leave, knowing there was a 
curfew. If I wasn’t back at my hotel soon, the authorities would 
notice. But as I approached the door, the host blocked my path. “Od 
chamesh dakot? Just five more minutes?” he pleaded. How could I 
say no? These Jews were thirsting for Hashem’s word.
I sat down again. Five minutes turned into fifteen. When I fi
nally stood up once more, he smiled again. “Od chamesh dakot…” 
Eventually, he said, “Tomorrow, I want to host a seudat peredah for 
you, a farewell meal. Please come to my apartment.” I agreed. 
That night, I wanted to bring him a gift. Something meaning
ful. I had brought along various Judaica items, so I began to think 
what I could give him. I considered a siddur, knowing that surely, 
he would treasure it. I also of a becher, a beautiful kiddush cup. But 
neither felt quite right. And then I saw it. It was a white challah 
cover, trimmed with blue thread, embroidered with a Magen David 
66
Tishrei Companion 5786
and the words “Shabbat Shalom.” That was it. I tucked it deep into 
my bag and went.
The next day, the seudah was something from another world. 
Holy, humble and filled with neshamos glowing in a tiny Soviet 
kitchen. At one point, the host—his name was Sasha—stepped out 
briefly. I approached him. “Sasha,” I said, “I have a matana (gift) for 
you.”
He didn’t respond. I repeated myself. “Sasha, here, this is for 
you.” Still unsure, I gently placed the bag in his hands.
He opened it slowly. And when he saw the white cloth, the blue 
embroidery, the words Shabbat Shalom, he broke down in tears. 
Tears of memory. Tears of longing. Then he motioned for me to fol
low him into the foyer. He reached up to a crumbling shelf, pulled 
out a folded paper napkin, and opened it carefully.
On it, drawn by hand in blue marker, was a Magen David. And 
written beneath it, in shaky but loving letters, were the words: 
Shabbat Shalom. Every week, for who knows how many years, this 
paper napkin had been Sasha’s challah cover. He took my cloth 
cover, kissed it, and placed it reverently on the shelf. Then he hand
ed me the napkin.
As I stepped out of that apartment, I was overcome with emo
tion. Hashem hadn’t just sent him a gift; He had matched the de
sign, the color, the sentiment to perfection. From cloth to paper, 
from blue thread to blue ink, it was Hashgachah Pratis in its purest 
form.
Sukkos reminds us that Hashem doesn’t just give us what we 
need. He gives us more. He gives us the Ananei HaKavod. He gives 
us the extra comfort, the extra love, the quiet embrace of Divine 
presence that whispers, “You are seen. You are remembered. You 
are Mine.”
May we sit in our Sukkah this year not just as a remembrance of 
the miracles, but as a testimony to Hashem’s infinite kindness; as a 
testimony to His love that shelters us, even when we don’t deserve 
it, even when we didn’t ask for it.
And may we, in return, offer our own matana to someone else, 
as an act of kindness that’s not required, but deeply remembered.
67
Tishrei Companion 5786
Listen to this audio on the TorahAnytime hotline: 
Watch this video on TorahAnytime:
Scan the QR code with a phone 
camera or enter this link online:
MyTAT.me/v208205
USA 718-298-2077 
Israel 072-398-2980 
UK 0330-1170305 
Canada 647-797-0056
Then dial extension 9208205#
Rabbi Ephraim Wachsman
Faith that Creates Reality
When a person sits beneath this abode, the Shadow of Faith 
(Zohar, Parshas Emor 103a)
When Yaakov Avinu beheld the vision of the sulam, the celes
tial ladder, he saw, “Malachei Elokim olim v’yordim bo—Angels as
cending and descending (Bereishis 28:12). But this was not only a 
vision of angels; it was a vision of nations. The Midrash Tanchuma 
(Parshas Vayeitzei, 2) teaches that Yaakov saw the sar (ministering 
angel) of Bavel ascend seventy rungs, and then descend. He then 
saw the sar of Greece, Persia, and Rome, all rising and ultimately 
falling. And then Hashem turned to Yaakov and said: “Lamah ein 
atah oleh—Why are you also not ascending?”
But Yaakov hesitated. “I am afraid,” he replied. “If I rise, I too 
might fall.” To that, Hashem responded, “If you ascend, you will 
never fall.”
But Yaakov declined. He didn’t believe he could ascend with
out eventually descending. And from that moment, Hashem de
clared: “Because you did not believe, your children will be subject 
to exile.” Not as a punishment, but as a consequence. The failure 
to believe in one’s ability to spiritually rise and remain there led to 
generations of spiritual exile.
This begs a difficult question. Yaakov was an ish emes, a man 
of truth. If he believed he might fall, wasn’t that the truth? Was it 
wrong of him to be cautious? Isn’t it realistic to expect that a spiri
tual high will eventually give way to a low? After all, who doesn’t 
experience a post–Yom Kippur decline?
And yet, this is where the Torah introduces us to a deeper idea. 
There is a level of truth that is created by emunah; a reality that 
emerges not from logic, but from faith.
The world often teaches us that faith must follow truth. First 
we see, then we believe. But Judaism teaches that sometimes, faith 
creates truth. The Zohar (Parshas Emor, 103a) refers to the Sukkah as 
Tzilah d’Mehemenusa, the “shadow of faith.” What is a shadow? It is 
68
Tishrei Companion 5786
a reflection that follows us wherever we go. When our faith is deep 
enough, it casts a spiritual shadow upon reality. It makes real that 
which was not yet real.
The Sukkah is not merely a temporary hut. Its halachic dimen
sions—the height, the walls, the entryway—are halachically valid 
even when, in the world of tangible fact and reality, it seems flimsy 
and makeshift. What gives it status? Halacha L’Moshe Mi’Sinai, a tra
dition rooted in emunah (see Sukkah 6b; Rambam, intro. to Mishnah). 
The faith in the halachic process creates reality.
Yaakov’s mistake was not in being honest, but in limiting his 
belief to what he perceived. Hashem wasn’t asking him to be naive. 
He was offering him a spiritual leap beyond the normal patterns of 
ascent and descent. But Yaakov didn’t believe in himself enough. 
He did not believe that he could rise and stay there. And so, his 
children would have to learn that lesson through centuries of exile.
We, the children of Yaakov, are now at the end of that exile. 
And precisely because we are still here, our emunah today is more 
powerful than ever. The Jewish people, scattered across continents, 
oppressed through generations, still cling to their G-d, their Torah, 
and their destiny. That alone is a miracle of faith. It defies history, 
it defies realistic facts, and yet, it is made possible only through 
emunah.
This is the meaning of the verse, “L’hagid baboker chasdecha 
v’emunasecha baleilos—To declare Your kindness in the morning, 
and Your faithfulness at night” (Tehillim 92:2). Daytime is when 
we see clarity and can experience and declare Hashem’s kindness 
openly and more easily. But nighttime is when we hold onto faith. 
Faith in the darkness that creates the dawn.
That is why immediately after Yom Kippur, we run into the 
Sukkah. The Sukkah represents not a reward for spiritual work, but 
the continuation of it. The Sukkah is a physical structure that is val
id only because of our faith. Its walls are halachically walls because 
we believe they are. Its schach is kosher because we received a tradi
tion that says it is. The Sukkah is not about dwelling in something 
real, but dwelling in a reality created by faith.
In that sense, the Sukkah is not just a booth, but the prototype 
for geulah (redemption). The world of Moshiach will be a world of 
emes (truth), but it will be an emes that transcends our current lim
69
Tishrei Companion 5786
itations. A miraculous emes, a Divine emes. And what will bring it 
about? Emunasecha baleilos, our faith in the night of exile; our refusal 
to give up when all seems lost.
The world Yaakov Avinu knew was a world of rise and fall. But 
today, standing at the threshold of redemption, we are called to a 
higher truth: to believe that we can change, that we do grow, and 
that our aliyah is real.
Every Jew who walks into Yom Kippur and says, “I want to be 
better,” is speaking a truth deeper than facts, because the neshama 
of a Jew is never lost. The soul of a Jew can achieve above and be
yond the ladder of its dreams.
So let us enter Sukkos not just with joy, but with faith.
Faith in Hashem. Faith in the Jewish people. And yes, faith in 
ourselves.
Watch this video on TorahAnytime:
Scan the QR code with a phone 
camera or enter this link online:
MyTAT.me/v163244
Listen to this audio on the TorahAnytime hotline: 
USA 718-298-2077 
Israel 072-398-2980 
UK 0330-1170305 
Canada 647-797-0056
Then dial extension 9163244#
Rabbi Fischel Schachter
The Palm Tree That Saved
“In booths you shall dwell for seven days” (Vayikra 23:42)
Sometimes the most powerful moments in life begin with the 
smallest, simplest decision.
A secular Israeli couple decided one year to build a Sukkah. 
Why? “Our kids know almost nothing about Judaism,” said the 
wife. “Let’s build a Sukkah, just so they have something, some 
connection.” Her husband was surprised. “But we’re not religious. 
We’re very leftist.” “Yeah, well... sometimes when you go far enough 
left, you wind up on the right,” argued the wife. So they built it.
They headed outside and gathered branches from a palm tree 
that stood outside their home to use as schach, the covering for the 
Sukkah. It was a small act of just one mitzvah, but to the family, it 
meant a lot. 
Then came October 7th.
The sirens, the terror, the rockets. The family ran into their ma
70
Tishrei Companion 5786
mad, their reinforced safe room, as terrorists stormed their commu
nity. Once inside, the father gripped the door handle as hard as 
he could, while terrorists tried again and again to break it open. 
Eventually, the terrorists gave up, but not without leaving their 
mark. They lit the house on fire, as flames began to rapidly spread, 
consuming the house. The door handle, jammed from the struggle, 
wouldn’t budge, leaving the family trapped inside the safe room, 
the only option being the window.
“Are you crazy?” the wife cried. “There are terrorists outside!” 
“We have no choice,” the husband said. “We’ll die here from the 
f
ire.” One by one, the family climbed out the window and into a 
world of smoke and fear. And then they began to run toward a 
palm tree. Its low branches offered a fragile shield, enabling them 
to camouflage as they crouched and hid. Hamas fighters passed by 
again and again, yet never noticed them.
At one point the father said, “I think I see a better place to 
hide—a burnt-out shelter across the street. Let’s run for it.” But the 
wife stopped him. “Hashem saved us here. Let’s stay.” And they 
did. They stayed by that tree until, hours later, they were rescued.
When they finally emerged, they saw that their home had been 
burned to the ground. Everything was gone. Except one thing.
The Sukkah. It remained untouched. And then they turned back 
and looked again at the tree that had sheltered them. 
It was the very palm tree from which they had taken the schach.
That is what happens when a Jew, no matter how distant, 
makes even a small decision to reconnect. One mitzvah. One step. 
One action to say, “I want to live a life of meaning. I want to give 
my children something to hold onto.”
And in return, Hashem gives us shelter.
Sometimes, quite literally.
Watch this video on TorahAnytime:
Scan the QR code with a phone 
camera or enter this link online:
MyTAT.me/v327772
Listen to this audio on the TorahAnytime hotline: 
USA 718-298-2077 
Israel 072-398-2980 
UK 0330-1170305 
Canada 647-797-0056
Then dial extension 9327772#
Rabbi Yisroel Majeski
Keep the Hat
“He who loves money will never be satisfied with money” (Koheles 5:10)
71
Tishrei Companion 5786
There’s an old story about a community that wanted to buy 
their beloved rabbi a new hat. He hadn’t gotten one since 
his bar mitzvah, and they figured it was time. And so, they 
approached him one day. 
“Rabbi, we want to take you shopping for a new hat and get 
you something nice. Come look with us.” The rabbi smiled warmly. 
“I appreciate it… but I should warn you, it’s going to be a very ex
pensive hat.” “Expensive?” they asked, confused. “What, you want 
a Borsalino? Maybe a special Italian felt hat?” “No, no” said the 
rabbi, shaking his head. “This hat is going to cost you one million 
dollars.”
They stare at him, stunned. “A million dollars? For a hat?” “You 
see, I’ll come home with this beautiful, stylish new hat and look in 
the mirror and say, ‘This hat is too elegant for this old suit.’ So now 
I’ll need a new suit.” They nodded, trying to keep up. “Okay… so 
we’ll buy you a suit.” The rabbi continued. “Well, now that I have 
a new suit and a stunning hat, how can I wear them with these 
scuffed shoes? I’ll need new shoes. And a tie, of course.” “Fine, Rab
bi, we’ll get you the whole outfit.” “But what about my Rebbetzin? 
I’m walking around in brand-new clothing, and she’s in her old 
wardrobe. It’s only fair to her if she gets a new sheitel. And once she 
gets a new sheitel, she’ll need a new wardrobe to match.” “Okay, 
okay,” they say. “We’ll get your wife a wardrobe too.” “But what 
about the kids?” the rabbi said. “You expect us to walk into shul, all 
dressed up, while the kids are in old hand-me-downs? They’ll need 
clothing too.” The congregants were now starting to sweat.
“And when we walk home,” the rabbi continued, “we’ll sit 
down at our old, scratched-up table. That won’t do. We’ll need a 
new table, new chairs, a new couch, new curtains, new kitchen, 
new bedrooms… We’ll need to redo the entire house. And by the 
time we’re finished, well… that hat is going to cost about a million 
dollars.”
The committee looked at each other, then back at the rabbi. 
“Okay, Rabbi,” they said. “Keep the hat.”
One thing is for sure. Desire has no ceiling. 
Shlomo HaMelech writes in Koheles, which is read over Suk
kos: “He who loves money will never be satisfied with money” (Ko
heles 5:10). The Pasuk doesn’t say that he who has money will never 
72
Tishrei Companion 5786
be satisfied. It talks about someone who loves money. The Torah 
doesn’t critique wealth; it critiques attachment. If you love it, chase 
it, need it, it’ll never be enough.
As the Midrash (Koheles Rabbah 3:13) puts it, “One who has 100, 
wants 200. If he has 200, he wants 400. And so on…” But the Mid
rash doesn’t leave it at that. It concludes with something haunting. 
“A person will not leave this world with even half his desires ful
f
illed.”
There’s one odd part about this statement, notes Rav Eliyahu 
Lopian zt”l. If a person has 100 and wants 200, then at least he has 
half? How can the Midrash say that he will not have half his desires 
fulfilled?
His answer is brilliant. When a person chases the next thing, the 
thing he already has becomes worthless in his eyes. The moment 
he sets his sights on the next desire, the current one loses meaning. 
Even the half he does have, he doesn’t truly enjoy.
And then comes Sukkos and tells us: Enough.
We leave our secure homes, our lavish furniture, our cli
mate-controlled walls, and we sit under flimsy schach, exposed 
to the wind, the noise, the world. And we say, “Baruch Hashem. 
Thank You, G-d, I have what I need.” Sukkos reminds us that joy 
comes not from accumulation, but from appreciation. It’s not about 
the hat or the house or the harvest. It’s about living with gratitude.
The Dubno Maggid put it this way in his inimitable mashal. 
There once was a simple, poor wagon driver who stopped at 
an inn for the night. Almost as soon as his head hit the pillow, he 
began drifting off into a dream. In the dream, he walked outside, 
dug into the earth behind the inn, and discovered a chest of gold.
That was enough to jolt him. He woke up, heart pounding. 
Could it be? Running outside, he began to dig. And to his amaze
ment, he hit something hard: gold coins! He was ecstatic. But not 
wanting anyone else to find out, especially the innkeeper, he quiet
ly went to the owner and said, “I want to buy your inn.” “It’s not for 
sale,” the innkeeper replied. “Name your price,” the man insisted. 
“Any price.” Eventually, the owner gave in. The man raced home, 
sold everything he had—his cart, his furniture, even his family’s 
beds—and returned to purchase the inn.
The next night, his family joined him. They grabbed shovels 
73
Tishrei Companion 5786
and began to dig frantically, searching for the treasure…
But nothing ever turned out.
All night they dug. Nothing. They then dug some more, all 
throughout the day, and still… nothing. Finally, the man stood 
back, breathing heavily. “I forgot to mention something…” he sud
denly said. “What?” they all shouted. He lowered his eyes. “It was 
a dream.”
They stared at him in shock. “We gave up everything for a 
dream?!”
The Dubno Maggid concluded. So many people give up their 
entire lives chasing a dream that was never real to begin with. A 
fantasy of wealth, prestige, power… and at the end, it’s all hevel 
havalim, vanity and illusion.
Sukkos tells us to live awake and to realize what truly matters. 
We are reminded to build our homes not with bricks and stone, 
but with love, faith, family and Torah. Sukkos tells us with utmost 
clarity that the most important things in life aren’t bought in stores 
or measured in dollars.
They’re sung in the Sukkah. They’re danced with our children. 
They’re whispered in prayer. They’re lived in moments of clarity 
and simplicity.
So as we enter Sukkos, let’s put the million-dollar hat aside, 
and step into the joy of knowing the truth of truths… “I have what 
I need.”
Watch this video on TorahAnytime:
Scan the QR code with a phone 
camera or enter this link online:
MyTAT.me/v163309
Listen to this audio on the TorahAnytime hotline: 
USA 718-298-2077 
Israel 072-398-2980 
UK 0330-1170305 
Canada 647-797-0056
Then dial extension 9163309#
74
Tishrei Companion 5786
Mobile App
150,000+ Downloads
Thousands of Stories for Kids
To help Yeshiva Students
5,000+ Members
Message “Add Me” to 929.602.9300
RebbeAnytime.com • 929.44.REBBE
Chesed
Publications
Number 1 Best Sellers
Newsletter
120,000+ Email Subscribers
TorahAnytime.com/Newsletter
For the beginner or curious
Story
JewishAnytime.com
Show Your Apprecitation
Make a Donation
See all TorahAnytime
Projects
50,000+ Subscribers
Message “Add Me” to 929.355.4268 or Email 
to DailyDoseEmail@TorahAnytime.com 
DAILY
Spreading the Most Torah in world history
METSIOS
HAKONES
HAMAFKID
TEFILLAS 
HASHACHAR
Much more to come...
Website
Hotline
3 Million+ Calls a Year

 ד"סב 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 1 - 
 
 
 
THANK YOU FOR MY FOOD! 
Part 2 
 הנורחא הכרב 
   ________________________ םש 
ד"סב 
Material culled from: 
תוכלה הנוש 
The Shalom-Mizrahi-Kassin Edition “In the Pathways of Birchas Hamazon”  (Torah Umesorah) 
Hilchos Seudah and Birkas Hamazon (Pirchei Shoshana)  
Siddurim: Living Lessons, Artscroll, The Feigenbaum Siddur 
https://halachipedia.com/index.php?title=Bracha_Achrona 
And Other Sources 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 2 - 
 ד"סב 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 3 - 
 
 
THANK YOU FOR MY FOOD! 
הנורחא הכרב 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Overview  ..................................................................................   1 
Hilchos Bracha Acharona ..........................................................   3 
     Reward for Bracha Acharona ....................................................   9 
      
Birchas Hamazon 
Layout and Formation ............................................................... 11 
     Hilchos Birchas Hamazon .......................................................... 17 
     Stories & Inspiration .................................................................. 26 
     Translation ................................................................................ 37 
 
     Mey’ein Shalosh 
     Overview  .................................................................................. 44 
     Hilchos Mey’ein Shalosh ............................................................ 46 
     Translation ................................................................................ 50 
 
Borei Nefashos 
     Hilchos Borei Nefashos .............................................................. 52 
     Translation ................................................................................ 53 
ד"סב 
Bentch and Internalize
")
י :ח
םירבד(
ךי ֶקֹולֶא 'ה תֶא
תְכ ַרֵב ו ָ
, ָ 
תְעָבָ שְו ָ תְלַכָאְו
" ָ 
And you shall eat, and be satisfied and bless Hashem, your G-d. 
From this קוספ we learn the אתיירואד בויח to say a הנורחא הכרב  
after we have finished eating. 
The food that Hashem provides for us  
gives us nourishment and energy throughout the day. 
Hashem instructed us to make a הכרב after we finish eating, 
to bring home the knowledge and awareness  
that all is from Him. 
As we delve deeper into הנורחא הכרב,  
let’s use it as a vehicle to bring us closer to Hashem,  
Luving Living Like a Yid even more! 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 1 - 
 ד"סב 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 2 - 
 
Avrohom Avinu’s Kiruv Tool 
 
Avraham Avinu reintroduced monotheism back into the world. How did he do it? 
   
The קוספ tells us: 
 ַ טִּ יַו ֥ע  ֶא֖ לֶ ש  ֵאְבִּ ב ֣ר  ָ ש֑ עַב  ִּ יַו ֨ א ָר ְק  ָ ש֔ם  ֵ שְ ב ֥ם  ֵק 'ה ֥ל  ָלֹוע )גל:אכ תישארב( ם 
And he planted an לשא in עבש ראב and he called there in the Name of 'ה. 
 
Rashi explains that this לשא was either an orchard or an inn.  
םישרפשמ explain that both are correct for לשא actually stands for: 
היול ,היתש ,הליכא – Giving to eat, to drink, and accompanying the guests. 
 
Rashi expounds further. 
  םֶׁהָל רֵמֹוא םי ִתֹו ׁשְו םי ִלְכֹואֶׁ ׁש רַחַאְל " , ֹולֶׁ ׁשִמ םֶׁ ּתְלַכֲאֶׁ ׁש י ִמְל ּוכ ְרָּב 
םֶׁ ּתְלַכֲא י ִ ּלֶׁ ּ ׁשִ ּמֶׁ ׁש ,םֶׁ ּתַא םי ִרּובְס - םֶׁ ּתְלַכֲא םָלֹועָה הָי ָהְו רָמָאֶׁ ׁש י ִמ לֶׁ ּ ׁשִמ ! " 
After his guests would finish eating and drinking  
he would instruct them to bless the provider of their food. 
“Do you think it was I who gave you your food? 
No, it was the One who said and created the world” 
 
Through the realization and acknowledgement  
of Hashem being the Provider of food to the world,  
Avraham Avinu was able to turn the tide  
and bring many back to serving Hashem. 
 
ד"סב 
General Halachos of Bracha Acharona - 1 
We are required to make a 
if we eat a יזכ
הנורח  
א הכרב
ת of food (approx. one ounce) within 4 minutes. 
For Sefardim דבעידב within 6 minutes ( ויצל רוא
ן
would also require a  
) or 7.5 minutes (
הנורחא
 הכרב
. 
                
There is an opinion that holds that we must make a 
הנורח  
ת
 ע
ד הוחי
א הכרב
when eating a naturally complete item, like a grape or cherry tomato,  
even if it is less than a תיזכ. 
Even though the halocho is not like this opinion,  
it is best to avoid eating a whole item,  
unless we are planning on eating a תיזכ worth. 
) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 3 - 
ד"סב 
General Halachos of Bracha Acharona - 2 
We are required to make a 
א הכרב
הנורח  
if we drink a תיעיבר of liquid within תיעיבר תייתש ידכ,  
which is one minute. 
 )
ןייטשנייפ השמ בר םשב
pg. 36
אי:ג יולה ןחלוש(
                
A תיעיבר is: 
According to Rav Chaim Noeh, 3 oz. 
According to Rav Moshe Feinstein, 3.3 oz 
According to the Chazon Ish, 5.3 oz. 
                
Some opinions hold that we are already required to make a 
if we drink a  יזכ
 ת 
הנורח  
א הכרב
of liquid.  
It is therefore best to avoid only drinking between a תיזכ and a תיעיבר. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 4 - 
ד"סב 
General Halachos of Bracha Acharona - 3 
How long do we have to say a הנורחא הכרב on food? 
If you ate food and were not full, you should try to bentch right away.  
If you didn’t, you may only make bentch up to 72 minutes after eating. 
(Some hold that in this case if you waited more than a half hour,  
it is preferable to have another  תיזכ of bread for ןוזמה תכרב,  
or food for the other תונורחא הכרב.) 
                
If you ate and are full, you should still bentch within 72 minutes. 
After 72 minutes, you may bentch as long as you are still full. 
However, if after 72 minutes, you are a little hungry,  
you can no longer bentch. 
If it’s past 72 minutes and you are unsure whether you are still full, 
you can bentch,  
however, it is preferable to eat another תיזכ of bread or food for ןוזמה  תכרב,  
or food for the other תונורחא הכרב. 
                
If you had a very long meal and continue to have food or drink, 
you may bentch as long as the meal continues, even 4 or 5 hours later. 
In this case, you should aim to eat or drink every 72 minutes,  
however, if you didn't, you may still say bentch. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 5 - 
ד"סב 
General Halachos of Bracha Acharona - 4 
How long do we have to say a הנורחא הכרב on drink? 
You should always try to say the הנורחא הכרב right away.  
If you didn’t, you may say the הנורחא הכרב  
as long as your thirst is still quenched from the drink. 
If it’s past 30 minutes and you are unsure whether you are still quenched, 
you can say the הנורחא הכרב, but it is best to have something else that will 
require that הנורחא הכרב. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 6 - 
ד"סב 
General Halachos of Bracha Acharona - 5 
If you were required to make a הנורחא הכרב  
and sipped your drink over a period of time, 
as long as there was less than 30 minutes in between sips,  
you can make a הנורחא הכרב at the end. 
If it will be 30 minutes or if you are unsure if it will be 30 minutes 
before the next time you drink,  
you should make a הנורחא הכרב now. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 7 - 
ד"סב 
General Halachos of Bracha Acharona - 6 
If you made a הנורחא הכרב  
and there was food stuck in your teeth, 
you can swallow it without making a bracha. 
                
Similarly, if you made a mistake and recited a הנורחא הכרב  
even though you thought that were going to eat more afterwards, 
you don't need to make a הנושאר הכרב for the food you had in mind.  
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 8 - 
ד"סב 
The Reward for Bracha Achrona - 1 
After Yosef Hatzadik finished eating, he thanked Hashem for his food.  
One day Potifar asked him what he was saying?  
He replied that he was thanking Hashem for his food.  
Since Yosef fulfilled Birchas Hamazon even while a slave in Mitzrayim,  
he was rewarded  
with being the one to provide food to the whole world! 
)בשיו 'פ ןהכ יתפש( 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 9 - 
ד"סב 
The Reward for Bracha Acharona - 2 
Whoever says Birchas Hamazon out loud,  
will be deserving of a long life. 
(
יגלפ םייח בר
 םייחה לוק
) 
                
If you bentch properly after each meal,  
you will be protected from sickness  
(
449
 ףד אתיב אפלא שרדמ
                
) 
One who is careful with bentching  
will have sustenance all of his life  
(לת הוצמ ךוניח רפס) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 10 - 
ד"סב 
ןוזמה תכרב
Layout & Formation of Birchas Hamazon 
The first three תוכרב in ןוזמה תכרב are אתיירואדמ. 
The fourth is ןנברדמ. 
The text that we have today was composed by different great people  
throughout the generations,  
and solidified by Ezra HaSofer and his Bais Din. 
The 1st  הכרב of ןזה (Who provides) 
was composed by Moshe Rabbeinu when the ןמ began to fall. 
While saying this הכרב we should have in mind Hashem’s kindness  
how He provides food for all living creations, tiny to huge,  
across the whole world, every single day, for all generations! 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 11 - 
ד"סב 
Layout & Formation – 2nd הכרב 
The 2nd  הכרב of הדונ (We are thankful) 
was composed by Yehoshua,  
when he and the nation entered into Eretz Yisroel. 
In this brocho, 
Yehoshua listed 7 things for us to be especially thankful to Hashem for. 
Since this is the הכרב of ‘Thanks’,  
we add the special ‘thank you’ of םיסינה לע on Chanukah and Purim. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 12 - 
ד"סב 
Layout & Formation – 3rd הכרב 
The 3rd הכרב of םחר (Have mercy) 
was composed by Dovid Hamelech & Shlomo Hamelech,  
and focuses on Yerushalyim and the Bais Hamikdash.  
Although bentching, and all mitzvohs, should be done with simcha,  
when we mention Hashem having mercy on Klal Yisroel  
and rebuilding of the Bais Hamikdash,  
we should say it with extra emotion. 
We add the word "ןמא" at the end of this הכרב  
to show that this is the end of the תוכרב that are אתיירואדמ, 
and from here forward are ןנברדמ תוכרב. 
We mention הצר and אוביו הלעי in this הכרב  
for these are תוליפת also wherein we ask Hashem for mercy. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 13 - 
ד"סב 
Layout & Formation – 4th הכרב 
The 4th  הכרב of ביטמהו בוטה (The Good, Who does good) 
52 years after the שדקמה תיב was destroyed,  
a Jewish warrior named Bar Kochva from Beitar 
led the Yidden in a revolt against the Romans.  
Bar Kochva had exceptional success.  
Unfortunately, Bar Kochva ended up attributing the success to himself,  
instead of to Hashem.  
As such, Hashem gave the Romans the ability to defeat the city.  
They killed thousands of Yidden in Beitar and did not let them be buried.  
Eventually, when Bnei Yisroel received permission to bury them, 
all the bodies were still fully whole 15 years later! 
In thanks for this tremendous סנ, 
Rabban Gamliel and his Bais Din composed this brocho  
thanking Hashem for this kindness and added it to ןוזמה תכרב. 
Since this הכרב is ןנברדמ  
it does not end with a הכרב to show it is different. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 14 - 
ד"סב 
Layout & Formation – 4th הכרב 
ןמחרה (The Merciful One) 
After doing a הוצמ, it is a good time to daven for personal requests.  
After recognizing all that Hashem does for us  
in the mitzvah of Birchas Hamazon,  
we then are ‘zoche’ to say the Horachamon’s  
requesting various things. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 15 - 
ד"סב 
Say it with Feeling 
Since we say תוכרב frequently, 
we run the risk of saying them by rote.  
It is important to know what we will be saying  
and to understand the words as we say them. 
It is especially important to focus on the introductory words of: 
'ה התא ךורב 
Hashem you are the source of all blessings 
וניקולא 
You are our G-d and how fortunate we are to have such a connection with You 
םלועה ךלמ 
You are the King of the vast universe,  
yet You care about and look after me! 
We should be careful to focus on the meanings of the words, 
and to say them with feeling and emotion 
( א:ה הרורב הנשמ) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 16 - 
ד"סב 
Hilchos Pre-Birchas Hamazon - 1 
1) We are required to say Birchas Hamazon 
if we ate a תיזכ of bread (around half a slice of rye bread). 
We should try to eat this amount within 4 minutes, 
however, as long as we ate this amount in the meal, 
we may bentch. 
                
2) If we ate this amount and combined with our meal we are satiated,  
then our bentching becomes אתיירואדמ,  
as the קוספ says "תעבשו" “and you are satisfied”. 
Otherwise, it is ןנברדמ. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 17 - 
ד"סב 
Hilchos Pre-Birchas Hamazon - 2 
ןוזמה ת 
כרב
covers all foods we ate in the meal.  
Therefore, even if we made a separate brocho on desert,  
or drank liquids during the meal,  
we do not need to say a separate 
הנור
ח
א הכרב
,  
rather they are ‘covered’ by saying ןוזמה תכרב. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 18 - 
ד"סב 
Hilchos Pre-Birchas Hamazon - 3 
We are supposed to say וזמה תכרב
ן 
in the place where we ate. 
(היחמה לע has the same ןיד for Ashkenazim.) 
1) If you intentionally left where you ate, 
you must return to the place where you ate to bentch.  
If you bentched in the second place, you are אצוי.  
2) If you unintentionally left where you ate: 
if you have bread (even less than a זכ
תי ) in the second place,  
you can eat it and bentch there. 
If you don’t have bread in the second place,  
you should return to the place where one ate unless there’s a great need.  
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 19 - 
ד"סב 
Hilchos Pre-Birchas Hamazon - 4 
3) Before bentching  
there is a minhag to say a קרפ of םיליהת: 
On days we say ןונחת, we say the קרפ of לבב תורהנ לע. 
On non-ןונחת days we say תולעמה ריש. 
                
4) Many have the הכלה  
to wash their hands with םינורחא םימ (‘the last waters’) before bentching. 
We should wash at least until the second knuckle. 
We may not talk from after םינורחא םימ until after bentching. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 20 - 
ד"סב 
Hilchos Pre-Birchas Hamazon - 5 
5) Even though the קוספ says "תכרבו" “And you shall bless” in singular,  
we have a rule of "ךלמ תרדה םע בורב" –  
“The more people doing the הוצמ, the more beauty for the King”.  
Therefore, when 3 or more men eat a ‘washing’ meal together, 
they must make a ןומיז. 
Women who are part of that meal are also required to answer to the ןומיז. 
                
If 10 or more men make up the  ןומיז, the word ‘וניקולא' is added in. 
                
Women on their own can make a ןומיז. 
Even if there are more than 10 women, they would not add in 'וניקולא'. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 21 - 
ד"סב 
Hilchos Pre-Birchas Hamazon - 6 
6) When bentching with a minyan, 
the גהנמ is  
to bentch with the leader holding a cup of wine. 
When three people make a ןומיז,  
it is an enhancement to the הוצמ to use a cup of wine. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 22 - 
ד"סב 
Hilchos Birchas Hamazon - 1 
1) Birchas Hamazon should be said  
while in one place, sitting, and sitting properly (not leaning back etc.) 
                
2) As we are talking to The King, 
we should be dressed appropriately when bentching. 
                
3) We should not do anything else while bentching, or saying any  הכרב, 
including clearing the table, signaling, saying nu nu etc 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 23 - 
ד"סב 
Hilchos Birchas Hamazon - 2 
4) It is best to bentch from a text, 
saying word by word, slowly, and out loud. 
                
5) Similar to הרשע הנומש, 
if we hear another הכרב or even kedushah in the middle of a הכרב of bentching,  
we may not interrupt to answer. 
)ד&ג הכלה תק 
ח
 'פ יח
 שיא ןב(
We would be allowed to answer  
once we have finished the 4th הכרב with ונרסחי לא. 
                
6) Birchas Hamazon should be said with joy and thankfulness. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 24 - 
ד"סב 
Hilchos Birchas Hamazon - 3 
On תבש we add the paragraph of  ר
הצ into the הכרב of םחר, 
and on בוט םוי we add ביו הלעי
א 
into םחר. 
If you forgot to say הצר or אוביו הלעי 
If you remembered before saying  'ה’s Name in םילשורי הנוב, 
say 
א 
ביו הלעי
/
ךקוח י
נדמל
הצר
and continue with  בו
הנ . 
If you remembered after saying 'ה’s Name, but before saying  הנוב,  
say 
, then say  
א
ביו הלעי
/
הצר
, and continue with 
הנ . 
בו
If you remembered after saying ...הנוב, finish the הכרב,  
and before the next הכרב say the special הכרב in place of  
א
ביו הלעי
If you began the next הכרב and already said לקה,  
bentching must be repeated from the beginning. 
ב
ןוזמה תכר only needs to be repeated if 
ר
הצ is not said  
by the Friday night and Shabbos day ודועס
ת
.  
It would not be repeated if it was forgotten by שילש הדועס
ת
Similarly regarding 
ןוזמה ת 
כרב
אביו הל ,  
עי
 י
/
. 
הצר
. 
would need to be repeated by the two בוט םוי seudos,  
but would not need to be repeated if forgotten on שדוח שאר or דעומה לוח.  
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 25 - 
ד"סב 
STORIES AND INSPIRATION 
The Golden Dove 
Rabba bar Bar Channa once was traveling with a group of non-Jews.  
He ate a meal but forgot to say Birkas Hamazon until they were on the way.  
As the הכלה is that we are to bentch in the place that we ate,  
he said to himself “What should I do?  
If I tell them that I forgot to bless Hashem,  
they will tell me to bless Him over here.  
They will say, ‘Wherever you are when you bless Him, He will be blessed.’  
I had better tell them that I left behind my pure gold statue of a dove.” 
When he told them, they agreed to stop and wait for him.  
He ran back to the place where he ate and said Birchas Hamazon.  
Hashem assisted him,  
and he found in that location a pure gold statue of a dove.  
(Berachos 53b)  
Rabba bar Bar Channa was allowed to say this since the mitzvohs, hence לארשי ינב,  
are compared to a dove, and mitzvos are precious like gold. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 26 - 
ד"סב 
No Warm Slippers 
Harav Ben Tzion Abba Shaul always said Birkas Hamazon  
with a lot of feeling and concentration.  
One snowy Shabbos, Rav Abba Shaul walked through the snow  
to give his shiur in the afternoon.  
When he came back home, his shoes and socks were soaking wet,  
and his feet were freezing cold.  
His family members quickly brought him dry socks and his slippers. 
After he ate Seudah Shelishis, he asked his wife for his shoes. 
“Why do you want them?” she asked. 
“For Birchas Hamazon, of course.” 
“But they’re all wet. Say Birchas Hamazon while wearing your slippers.” 
“What?” Rav Abba Shaul shuddered to hear this.  
“I should say Birchas Hamazon while wearing slippers?” 
The family had no choice,  
and Rav Abba Shaul put on his cold, wet shoes again to say Birchas Hamazon. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 27 - 
ד"סב 
For This I Have Plenty of Time 
Someone was sitting with Rav Yaakov Kaminetzky"l (I believe)  
while he was eating.  
After talking for some time,  
Rav Yaakov hurriedly finished the conversation and excused himself  
because he had to bentch and go.  
The person watched as Rav Yaakov then bentched slowly and carefully. 
Although Rav Yaakov was in a rush,  
he cheshboned on the amount of time to bentch properly,  
as if he had all the time available. 
(Heard from Rabbi Aaron Shmuel Wealcatch) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 28 - 
ד"סב 
Bentching for Life
Reb Shimon was an elderly Yid who lived in Yerushalayim.  
When he was young (before the Holocaust), he lived in Lublin.  
One day, Rav Meir Shapiro zt'l came to his cheder to test the talmidim.  
Sometimes, after testing the children, they would receive a treat. 
This time Rav Meir told them, 
"Instead of a gift, I will tell you a wonderful segulah.  
If you follow my advice, you will be successful and always lead a tranquil life. 
“It is brought down that one who is careful in bentching  
is especially beloved to Hakadosh Baruch Hu.” 
“Secondly, the Bach states, if you look through bentching,  
you will notice that every letter in the Alef Beis is represented there,  
except for one, the “final fey” “ף”.  
There is a reason for this: 
The word “ףא”, which means anger, ends in a fey.  
The word “ףצק”, which means fury, also ends with this letter.  
We don’t mention things that could indirectly be referring to the ‘anger’ of 'ה.  
If you bentch with kavanah, you will be zoche  
to never see the ףא or ףצק of Hakadosh Baruch Hu directed against you.” 
He also told them the Be'er Heitav that we should always be careful  
to say birchas hamazon from a siddur and not by heart." 
“Finally, the Sefer Hachinuch says that anyone who bentches with kavanah  
will have no difficulties with parnassah his entire life.” 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 29 - 
ד"סב 
Reb Shimon took the lesson to heart.  
He decided that he would be very careful with birchas hamazon.  
He kept this kabalah throughout his entire life.  
In cheder, his friends would bench quickly and go out to play,  
while he lingered behind, in order to bench properly.  
It was challenging,  
but he didn’t want to abandon this wonderful gift that Rav Shapiro gave him. 
A few years later, the Nazis invaded Poland.  
Reb Shimon was standing in line for a 'selektzia.'  
Whoever was short was sent to the left for execution.  
Reb Shimon prayed that he should be saved from 'wrath and destruction'  
in the merit of his birchas hamazon.  
When it was his turn, he stood on his toes to appear higher;  
the Nazi signaled him to the right.  
His life was saved in the merit of birchas hamazon. 
Soon afterwards, Reb Shimon found himself standing in line again.  
This time, each person had to tell the Nazi what he could did for parnassah.  
Reb Shimon didn’t know what he could say;  
he was only a teenager, taken away from yeshiva. 
As he waited in line he davened,  
"In the merit of birchas hamazon, which is mesugal for parnassah, Hashem, 
please help me…" 
All of a sudden, the person behind him tapped him on the shoulder and said, 
"Tell the Nazi that you are a cook and that I'm your helper."  
He said this and they were both sent to work in the kitchen.  
As the Chinuch promised, because he was careful with birchas hamazon,  
he was sent to work in the kitchen, where he had enough food to eat. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 30 - 
ד"סב 
Even in the camps, Reb Shimon continued to be careful with birchas hamazon. 
For example, if he understood that he wouldn’t have enough time to say  
birchas hamazon properly, then he wouldn’t eat bread to begin with. 
Once, a Nazi saw Shimon working in the kitchen and he wasn't pleased that he 
had this 'good' position, surrounded with food. 
"What are you doing here? You look like a young child." 
"I work here," Shimon explained. "I am a cook." 
The Nazi took Shimon outside and showed him a stony area, outside the kitchen. 
"Dig a two meter ditch here.  
You have two hours to finish, or you will be buried in it."  
With that, he gave him a tiny shovel. 
The task the Nazi gave Shimon was absolutely impossible! 
The ground was covered with heavy stones, he only had two hours to finish, 
and he was given only a small shovel to work with. 
Reb Shimon raised his eyes to heaven and said,  
"I say birchas hamazon with kavanah, please save me! 
I was saved before. Please save me again in this merit." 
A few moments later a German jeep drove by, filled with Nazis. 
Seeing this young lad trying to dig a ditch with a small shovel, they began to 
tease him, throwing tomatoes, potatoes, carrots, and other vegetables at him. 
Reb Shimon thought,  
"I see that in the merit of birchas hamazon, I again received abundance.  
Now I need the blessings for protection from wrath and destruction as well." 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 31 - 
ד"סב 
Shortly afterwards a jeep with Polish soldiers showed up.  
When they saw the vegetables around Shimon, they stopped to ask for them. 
With an authoritative voice, Shimon told them,  
"When there is a pit two meters deep here, I will give you the vegetables." 
The soldiers had the right tools for digging.  
They took them out of their jeep, and began digging the trench.  
There were several of them, so they were able to finish the job in a half-hour. 
The Nazi returned and saw that the task was completed.  
He said, "I always knew that G-d takes care of you.  
I just didn’t realize to what extent."  
Shimon was saved once again, in the merit of birchas hamazon. 
Shimon returned to his job at the kitchen in Auschwitz.  
Through incredible nissim, he was zoche to survive the war.  
He moved to Eretz Yisrael where he built a beautiful family.  
Throughout his life, he always had a parnassah  
and was able to support his married children as well. 
Shimon would always tell over the story  
of his miraculous, food-themed, survival of the war  
and of his subsequent financial hatzlacha,  
always attributing it to his being careful in birchas hamazon  
as he had been taught by R’ Meir Shapiro so many years before. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 32 - 
ד"סב 
Look inside 
Reb Mattisyahu Solomon, zt”l, once spent a day observing Rav Shach.   
Every person who came to Rav Shach, regardless of the reason for their visit, 
was given the same הצע- "Bentch from inside a Bentcher."   
One of the people who came that day was an בושח םדא,  
and was noticeably disappointed with what Rav Shach told him.   
Rav Shach said,  
"You know, Rav Chaim Ozer Grodzensky was a big Gaon. 
He had a tremendous memory,  
and even so he used to look inside when he bentched..."   
(As heard from Reb Shmuel Felder, Shlit"a, by Rabbi Shimmy Sternfield) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 33 - 
ד"סב 
Write It Down 
Rav Shach once told someone to bentch from inside a bentcher.   
When the man returned and told Rav Shach that his situation hadn't improved, 
Rav Shach asked him if he had been bentching inside.   
The man replied that he had been,  
except once when he was on the plane and didn't have a bentcher. 
"A weak Kabbalah," said Rav Shach. "How did you bentch?" 
"I bentched by heart." 
"You know the words of bentching,  
so why didn't you write them down and bentch inside!" 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 34 - 
ד"סב 
V’lo Nikashel 
A man in Eretz Yisroel was bentching out loud and said at the end of םחר  
as per his minhag "דֶׁעָו םָלֹועְל לֵ ׁשָ ּכִנ אֹלְו םֵלָ ּכִנ אֹלְו ׁ שֹובֵנ אֹ ּלֶׁ ׁש".  
An irreligious looking lady next to him said  
"there's no  לֵ ׁשָ ּכִנ - its only “ 
םֵלָ ּכִנ 
אֹלְו ׁ שֹובֵנ אֹ ּלֶׁ ׁש
". 
He was surprised that she knew this and she said that she used to be frum. 
That day he went to a library that had old manuscripts  
and found an original text that had his nusach.  
He made himself a copy of the nusach.  
The next day he found her (they ate lunch in the same area) and showed her.  
She was surprised and grateful that he took the time. 
Years later he got a letter in the mail with a wedding invitation from that lady. 
She explained that at the time that they spoke  
she was about to sadly marry an Arab she had met at University.  
She was inspired by this person bentching  
and she began to think how he was showing her the words "  לֵ ׁשָ ּכִנ אֹלְו " –  
which Chazal tell us means we should not stumble off the path of Yiddishkeit. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 35 - 
ד"סב 
Realizing that this was a sign from Hashem,  
she took the message to heart and decided to cancel her engagement.  
The Arab showed his true colors and began to be violent and she ran away. 
She slowly started to return to Yiddishkeit  
and is now marrying a properly religious boy. 
Enclosed with the letter was an invitation to her wedding. 
All in the Zechus of him saying a bentching clearly and out loud. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 36 - 
 ד"סב 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 37 - 
 
 ִּ ב ְר ַכ ַה ת ָמ ֹוזן 
(loosely translated to make easier to understand) 
 
  ,'ה הָ ּתַא ְ ךּורָּב ................................ ................................ .... Hashem, You are Source of all blessing 
  ,םָלֹועָה ְ ךֶׁלֶׁמ ּוני ֵקֹלֱא ................................ ................................ ......... Our G-d, King of the universe 
  ֹובּוטְ ּב ֹו ּלֻּ ּכ םָלֹועָה תֶׁא ןָ ּז ַה ............................... Who nourishes the whole world with His goodness 
  ,םי ִמֲח ַרְבּו דֶׁסֶׁחְ ּב ן ֵחְ ּב ................................ With graciousness, with kindness, and with compassion 
 רָ שָּב לָכְל םֶׁחֶׁל ן ֵתֹונ אּוה ................................ ............................... He gives ‘bread’ to all creations 
 . ֹו ּדְסַח םָלֹועְל י ִ ּכ ................................ ................................ ....................  For His kindness is forever. 
  לֹודָ ּגַה ֹובּוטְבּו ................................ ................................ ......................... And in His great goodness 
  ,ּונָל רַסָח אֹל די ִמָ ּת ................................ ................................ ...................... We were never lacking 
דֶׁעָו םָלֹועְל ן ֹוז ָמ ּונָל רַסְחֶׁי לַאְו ,   ................................ ........................ And may we never lack food 
  ,לֹודָ ּגַה ֹומְ ׁש רּובֲעַ ּב ................................ ................................ .............. Because of His great Name 
לֹ ּכַל סֵנ ְרַפ ְמּו ןָז לֵק אּוה י ִ ּכ ................................ .. For He is the G-d Who nourishes and sustains all 
  ,לֹ ּכַל בי ִטֵמּו ................................ ................................ ................................ And He does good to all 
  ן ֹוז ָמ ןי ִכֵמּו ................................ ................................ ..................... And He prepares nourishing food 
  .א ָרָּב רֶׁ ׁשֲא וי ָתֹוּי ִרְ ּב לָכְל ................................ ....................... For all His creations that He created. 
ה הָ ּתַא ְ ךּורָּב '  , ................................ .............................. Hashem, You are the source of all blessing 
 .לֹ ּכַה תֶׁא ןָ ּז ַה ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ Who nourishes all. 
 ד"סב 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 38 - 
 
2nd Bracha 
 
ה , ָ ךְ ּל הֶׁדֹונ '   ,ּוני ֵקֹלֱא ................................ ................................ We thank You Hashem, our G-d 
  ּוני ֵתֹובֲאַל ָ ּתְלַחְנ ִהֶׁ ׁש לַע ................................ ........................... Because You gave to our ancestors 
 ,הָבָח ְרּו הָבֹוט ה ָד ְמֶׁח ץ ֶׁרֶׁא ................................ .................... A precious, good, and spacious land  
 ,םי ַרְצִמ ץ ֶׁרֶׁאֵמ ּוני ֵקֹלֱא 'ה ּונ ָתאֵצֹוהֶׁ ׁש לַעְו .... And for (You) Hashem, our G-d, taking us out of Mitzrayim, 
  ,םי ִדָבֲע תי ֵ ּב ִמ ּונ ָתי ִדְפּו ................................ .............................. And for redeeming us from slavery 
  ,ּונ ֵרָ שְבִ ּב ָ ּתְמַתָחֶׁ ׁש ָ ך ְתי ִרְ ּב לַעְו ................................ .......... And for the bris You sealed in our flesh  
 ,ּונ ָ ּת ְדַ ּמִ ּלֶׁ ׁש ָ ך ְת ָרֹו ּת לַעְו ................................ ........................... And for the Torah that You taught us 
 ,ּונ ָ ּתְע ַדֹוהֶׁ ׁש ָ ךי ֶׁ ּקֻּח לַעְו ................................ ............... And for the mitzvohs that You informed us of 
  ,ּונ ָ ּתְנַנ ֹוחֶׁ ׁש דֶׁסֶׁחָו ן ֵח םיִ ּי ַח לַעְו ...... And for the life, , lovingkindness that you graciously gave to us  
  ,די ִמָ ּת ּונ ָתֹוא סֵנ ְרַפ ְמּו ןָז הָ ּתַאָ ׁש ן ֹוז ָמ תַלי ִכֲא לַעְו And for the food that You nourish and provide 
for us constantly 
.הָעָ ׁש לָכְבּו תֵע לָכְבּו םֹוי לָכְ ּב ................................ ....... Every day, at all times, and in every hour. 
 
  , ְ ךָל םי ִדֹומ ּונ ְחַנֲא ,ּוני ֵקֹלֱא 'ה ,לֹ ּכַה לַעְו ................. And for it all, Hashem, our G-d, we thank You 
  , ְ ךָתֹוא םי ִכ ְרָב ְמּו ................................ ..... And acknowledge that You are the source of all blessings 
  .דֶׁעָו םָלֹועְל די ִמָ ּת י ַח לָ ּכ י ִפְ ּב ָ ך ְמִ ׁש ְ ך ַרָּב ְתִי ..... May Your Name be blessed by all constantly and 
forever 
  ,בּותָ ּכַ ּכ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ As it is written 
“ ָ ךי ֶׁקֹלֱא 'ה תֶׁא ָ ּתְכ ַרֵבּו ָ ּתְעָבָ שְו ָ ּתְלַכָאְו ......... “And you will eat and be satisfied and you will bless 
Hashem your G-d 
  ְ ךָל ן ַתָנ רֶׁ ׁשֲא הָבֹ ּטַה ץ ֶׁרָאָה לַע ”  . ................................ .. For the good land that He has given you”  
  ,'ה הָ ּתַא ְ ךּורָּב ................................ ............................ Hashem, You are the source of all blessings, 
 .ן ֹוז ָ ּמַה לַעְו ץ ֶׁרָאָה לַע ................................ ................................ .......... On the land and on the food  
 ד"סב 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 39 - 
 
3rd Bracha 
 
  ,ּוני ֵקֹלֱא 'ה )אָנ( םֵח ַר ................................ ................................ ........ (Please) Have mercy Hashem 
  , ָ ךֶׁ ּמַע לֵא ָר ְ שִי לַע ................................ ................................ ......................... On Yisroel, Your nation 
  , ָ ך ֶׁרי ִע םִיַלָ ׁשּורְי לַעְו ................................ ................................ ...... And on Yerushalayim, Your city, 
  , ָ ך ֶׁדֹובְ ּכ ן ַ ּכ ְ ׁשִמ ן ֹוּי ִצ לַעְו ................................ .............. And on Tzion the resting place of Your Glory 
  , ָ ךֶׁחי ִ ׁשְמ דִו ָ ּד תי ֵ ּב תּוכְלַמ לַעְו ........ And on the kingdom of the house of Dovid, Your anointed one 
.ויָלָע ָ ך ְמִ ׁש א ָר ְקִ ּנ ֶׁ ׁש ׁשֹודָ ּקַהְו לֹודָ ּגַה תִי ַ ּבַה לַעְו ..... And on the great and holy house, which Your 
Name is called on.  
 ,ּוני ִבָא ,ּוני ֵקֹלֱא ................................ ................................ ................................ ... Our G-d, Our Father 
 ,ּונ ֵע ְר ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ . Care for us 
  ,ּונֵנּוז ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... Feed us 
  ,ּונ ֵסְנ ְרַ ּפ ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................... Provide for us  
  ,ּונֵלְ ּכְלַכְו ................................ ................................ ................................ ................... and support us 
  ,ּונֵחי ִו ְרַהְו ................................ ................................ ................................ .. and provide us with plenty 
  ,ּוני ֵתֹורָצ לָ ּכ ִמ ה ָרֵהְמ ּוני ֵקֹלֱא 'ה ּונָל חַו ְרַהְו ... And, Hashem, our G-d, save us quickly from all of 
our troubles 
  ,ּוני ֵקֹלֱא 'ה ,ּונֵכי ִרְצַ ּת לַא אָנ ְו ........................ And please, Hashem, our G-d, don’t make us need  
  ,ם ָדָו רָ שָּב תַנ ְּתַמ י ֵדי ִל אֹל ................................ ............................... Not the gifts of flesh and blood 
  ,םָתָאָו ְלַה י ֵדי ִל אֹלְו ................................ ................................ ............................ And not their loans 
 ,הָבָח ְרָהְו הָ ׁשֹוד ְ ּקַה ,הָחּותְ ּפַה ,הָאֵל ְ ּמַה ָ ך ְדָי ְל ם ִא י ִ ּכ . Rather only from Your hand, which is full, 
open, holy, and generous,  
 .דֶׁעָו םָלֹועְל םֵלָ ּכִנ אֹלְו ׁשֹובֵנ אֹ ּלֶׁ ׁש .......................... So we are never embarrassed nor disgraced. 
 
  .ּוני ֵמָי ְב ה ָרֵהְמִ ּב ׁשֶׁדֹ ּקַה רי ִע םִיַלָ ׁשּורְי הֵנ ְבּו . And rebuild Yerushalayim, Your holy city, quickly, in 
our days. 
  ,'ה הָ ּתַא ְ ךּורָּב ................................ ............................ Hashem, You are the source of all blessings, 
.םִיָלָ ׁשּורְי וי ָמֲח ַרְב הֵנ ֹו ּב ................................ .................... Who rebuilds Yerushalayim in His Mercy 
 ן ֵמָא ................................ ................................ ................................ .................. Omein! (That is true!)  
 ד"סב 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 40 - 
 
4th Bracha 
 
  ,םָלֹועָה ְ ךֶׁלֶׁמ ּוני ֵקֹלֱא 'ה הָ ּתַא ְ ךּורָּב You are the source of all blessings, , King Hashem, our G-d, 
King of the universe 
 ,לֵקָה ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................. The Almighty 
  ,ּוני ִבָא ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................... Our Father 
  ,ּונֵ ּכְלַמ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ . Our King 
  ,ּונ ֵרי ִ ּדַא ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................... Our Strength 
  ,ּונ ֵא ְרֹו ּב ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................... Our Creator 
  ,ּונֵלֲאֹוּג ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................... Our Redeemer 
  ,ּונ ֵרְצֹוי ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................. Our Maker 
 ּונ ֵ ׁשֹוד ְק ,  ,בֹקֲעַי ׁשֹוד ְק ................................ ............... Our Holy One, The Holy One of Yaakov Avinu 
 ּונ ֵעֹור ,  ,לֵא ָר ְ שִי הֵעֹור ................................ ................. Our Shepherd, The Shepherd of Klal Yisroel 
 בֹו ּטַה ְ ךֶׁלֶׁ ּמַה ,לֹ ּכַל בי ִטֵ ּמַהְו ................................ ..........  The King who is Good and does good to all 
  םֹויָו םֹוי לָכְ ּבֶׁ ׁש ................................ ................................ ............................ For each and every day 
  ,בי ִטֵה אּוה ................................ ................................ ................................ ........... He has done good 
  ,בי ִטֵמ אּוה ................................ ................................ ................................ .................. He does good 
  .ּונָל בי ִטיֵי אּוה ................................ ................................ ................................ . He will do good to us 
  ,ּונָלָמְג אּוה ................................ ................................ ................................ .. He generously gave us  
  ,ּונֵל ְמֹוג אּוה ................................ ................................ ............................... He generously gives us   
  ,דַעָל ּונֵל ְמְגִי אּוה ................................ ................................ ........ He will generously give us forever 
  םי ִמֲח ַרְלּו דֶׁסֶׁחְלּו ן ֵחְל ................................ .............. (He will give us) grace, kindness, compassion 
 ,הָחָלְצַהְו הָלָ ּצַה חַו ֶׁרְלּו ................................ ......... With relief, rescue (from troubles), and success 
 ,הָמָחֶׁנ ,הָעּו ׁשי ִו הָכ ָרְ ּב ................................ ................................ ... Blessing, salvation, and comfort 
  ,הָלָ ּכְלַכְו הָסָנ ְרַ ּפ ................................ ................................ .......................... Livelihood and support  
  ,בֹוט לָכְו םֹולָ ׁשְו םיִ ּי ַחְו םי ִמֲח ַרְו ................................ ..... And mercy, life, peace, and all goodness  
 .ּונ ֵרְ ּסַחְי לַא םָלֹועְל בּוט לָ ּכ ִמּו ...... And from all good things, please don’t let us be lacking forever. 
 ד"סב 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 41 - 
 
Additional Requests 
 
ן ָמֲח ַרָה .דֶׁעָו םָלֹועְל ּוניֵלָע ְ ךֹול ְמִי אּוה , .... The Compassionate One, may He rule over us forever. 
 
ן ָמֲח ַרָה .ץ ֶׁרָאָבּו םִי ַמָ ׁשַ ּב ְ ך ַרָּב ְתִי אּוה , ... The Compassionate One, may He be blessed throughout 
the heavens and earth. 
 
ן ָמֲח ַרָה  ,םי ִרֹו ּד רֹודְל חַ ּבַ ּתְ ׁשִי אּוה , .. The Compassionate One, may He be praised throughout all 
generations 
  ,םי ִחָצְנ חַצֵנְלּו דַעָל ּונָּב רַאָ ּפ ְתִי ְו ................................ ..... And glorified through us forever and ever 
 .םי ִמָלֹוע י ֵמְלֹועְלּו דַעָל ּונָּב ר ַ ּדַהְתִי ְו ....................... And be beautified through us forever and ever. 
 
ן ָמֲח ַרָה .דֹובָכְ ּב ּונ ֵסְנ ְרַפְי אּוה , . The Compassionate One, may He provide for us in a dignified way. 
 
ן ָמֲח ַרָה  ּונ ֵראָ ּוַצ לַעֵמ ּונֵ ּלֻּע רֹו ּב ְ ׁשִי אּוה , ..... The Compassionate One, may He break our yoke (of 
galus) from on our necks,  
 .ּונֵצ ְרַאְל תּוּי ִמְמֹוק ּונֵכי ִלֹוי אּוהְו ................................ ........ And may He lead us proudly to our land 
 
ן ָמֲח ַרָה  ,הֶׁ ּז ַה תִי ַ ּבַ ּב הָּב ֻּר ְמ הָכ ָרְ ּב ּונָל חַל ְ ׁשִי אּוה , .......... The Compassionate One, may He send 
bountiful blessing in this house 
 .ויָלָע ּונְלַכָאֶׁ ׁש הֶׁז ן ָחְלֻּ ׁש לַעְו ................................ ......... And on this table at which we have eaten. 
 
ן ָמֲח ַרָה  ,בֹו ּטַל רּוכָז אי ִבָ ּנ ַה ּוהָ ּי ִלֵא תֶׁא ּונָל חַל ְ ׁשִי אּוה , . The Compassionate One, may He send 
us Eliyahu HaNavi, who is remembered for the good, 
 .תֹומָחֶׁנְו תֹועּו ׁשְי תֹובֹוט תֹורֹו שְ ּב ּונָל רֶׁ ּ שַבי ִו ............. And he should inform us, the good news (of 
Moshiach), with salvation and comfort.s 
 ד"סב 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 42 - 
 
ן ָמֲח ַרָה ְ ך ֵרָבְי אּוה , ................................ ................................ .......... The Merciful One, may He bless 
 ,י ִת ָרֹומ י ִ ּמִא תֶׁאְו ,י ִרֹומ י ִבָא תֶׁא ..................... My father, my teacher, and my mother, my teacher, 
 ְו  ,הֶׁ ּז ַה תִי ַ ּבַה לֲעַ ּב תֶׁא ................................ ................................ ........... And the owner of this house 
  םָע ְרַז תֶׁאְו םָתי ֵ ּב תֶׁאְו םָתֹוא ................................ ... Them and their household, their descendants, 
  ,םֶׁהָל רֶׁ ׁשֲא לָ ּכ תֶׁאְו ................................ ................................ ...................... And all that they have  
  ,ּונָל רֶׁ ׁשֲא לָ ּכ תֶׁאְו ּונ ָתֹוא ................................ ................................ ......... Us, and all that we have  
 ,בֹקֲעַי ְו קָחְצִי םָה ָרְבַא ,ּוני ֵתֹובֲא ּוכ ְרָּב ְתִנ ֶׁ ׁש ֹומְ ּכ ........ Like you blessed our forefathers, Avraham, 
Yitzchak, and Yaakov  
" לֹ ּכַ ּב " , ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ “In everything” 
" לֹ ּכ ִמ " , ................................ ................................ ................................ ................... “From everything” 
" לֹ ּכ " , ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................... “With everything” 
  דַחַי ּונָ ּלֻּ ּכ ּונ ָתֹוא ְ ך ֵרָבְי ןֵ ּכ ................................ ................................ .......... So too, bless us together 
 ,הָמֵל ְ ׁש הָכ ָרְבִ ּב ................................ ................................ ............................ with a complete brocho 
 .ן ֵמָא רַמאֹנ ְו ................................ ................................ .................. And say “Omein” (That is all true!) 
 
  ,תּוכְז ּוניֵלָעְו םֶׁהיֵלֲע ּוד ְ ּמַלְי םֹורָ ּמַ ּב ............. In the heavens may merits be found for them and us 
  ,םֹולָ ׁש ת ֶׁרֶׁמְ ׁשִמְל אֵהְּתֶׁ ׁש ................................ .................... That there should be everlasting peace 
  ,'ה תֵאֵמ הָכ ָרְב אָ ּ שִנ ְו ................................ ...................... May we receive blessings from Hashem  
 ,ּונ ֵע ְ ׁשִי י ֵקֹלֱאֵמ הָק ָדְצּו ................................ .................. And kindness from the G-d of our salvation 
  בֹוט לֶׁכֵ שְו ן ֵח אָצְמִנ ְו ................................ .......................... And find favor and good understanding  
 ֹלֱא יֵני ֵעְ ּב ִק .ם ָדָאְו םי ................................ ................................ ....... In the eyes of Hashem and man. 
 
  ַחי ִ ׁשָ ּמַה תֹומי ִל ּונֵ ּכַזְי אּוה ,ן ָמֲח ַרָה ...... The Compassionate One, may He give us the privilege (of 
living) to the days of Moshiach  
 .אָּבַה םָלֹועָה יֵ ּי ַחְלּו ................................ ................................ .................... And to life in Olam Haba 
 , ֹו ּכְלַמ תֹועּו ׁשְי לי ִ ּדְג ַמ ................................ ................................ He gives great victories to his king 
,דִו ָדְל ֹוחי ִ ׁשְמִל דֶׁסֶׁח הֶׁ שֹעְו ................................ . And does kindness to his anointed one, to Dovid, 
  .םָלֹוע דַע ֹוע ְרַז ְלּו ................................ ................................ .................... And to his children forever 
 ד"סב 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 43 - 
 
 ,וי ָמֹור ְמִ ּב םֹולָ ׁש הֶׁ שֹע ................................ ........... May Hashem who makes peace in the heavens 
  םֹולָ ׁש הֶׁ שֲעַי אּוה ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... Make peace  
 ,לֵא ָר ְ שִי לָ ּכ לַעְו ּוניֵלָע ................................ ................................ ............... On us and all of Yisroel 
 .ן ֵמָא ּור ְמִאְו ................................ ................................ ............................ And say “Omein” (It is true!) 
 
 
  ,וי ָ ׁשֹוד ְק 'ה תֶׁא ּוארְי ................................ ................................ .......... Fear Hashem, His holy ones, 
 .וי ָא ֵרי ִל רֹוסְחַמ ןי ֵא י ִ ּכ ................................ ...... For there is nothing lacking for those who fear Him 
  ,ּובֵע ָרְו ּו ׁשָר םי ִרי ִפְ ּכ ................................ ....................... Young lions can become poor and hungry 
  .בֹוט לָכ ּורְסְחַי אֹל 'ה י ֵ ׁש ְרֹודְו ...... But those who seek Hashem, will not be lacking any goodness 
  ,בֹוט י ִ ּכ 'הַל ּודֹוה ................................ ......................... Praise Hashem, for all that He does is good 
  . ֹו ּדְסַח םָלֹועְל י ִ ּכ ................................ ................................ ..................... For His kindness is forever 
  , ָ ך ֶׁדָי תֶׁא ַחֵתֹו ּפ ................................ ................................ ................................ . You open Your hand 
 .ן ֹוצ ָר י ַח לָכְל ַעי ִ ּב ְ שַמּו ................................ .................... And satisfy all living things as they desire 
 ,'הַ ּב חַטְבִי רֶׁ ׁשֲא רֶׁבֶׁ ּגַה ְ ךּורָּב ................................ .......... Blessed is the man who trusts in Hashem 
  . ֹוחַטְב ִמ 'ה הָי ָהְו ................................ ................................ ..... And is secure in his trust in Hashem  
  ,י ִּתְנ ַקָז םַג י ִתיִי ָה רַעַנ ................................ ............................ I was young and I also have grown old 
 ,בָזֱעֶׁנ קי ִ ּדַצ י ִתי ִא ָר אֹלְו ................................ ....... And I did not see a righteous person abandoned 
  .םֶׁחָל ׁשֶׁ ּקַב ְמ ֹוע ְרַז ְו ................................ ................................ ..... And his children begging for bread 
  ,ן ֵ ּתִי ֹו ּמַעְל זֹע 'ה ................................ ................................ .. Hashem will give strength to His nation 
.םֹולָ ּ ׁשַב ֹו ּמַע תֶׁא ְ ך ֵרָבְי 'ה ................................ .................. Hashem will bless His nation with peace 
 
 
 
ד"סב 
The הכרב of שלש ןיעמ (commonly known as היחמה לע)  
is an abridged version of  ןוזמה תכרב,  
and incorporates ideas from its’ first three תוכרב,  
hence the name 'שלש ןיעמ' – ‘a sampling of three’. 
                
שלש ןיעמ is said after eating/drinking the required amount of: 
• Non-bread foods from the 5 types of grain: wheat, barley, spelt, oats, & rye 
(that are baked, cooked, or fried. Roasted, however, would be תושפנ ארוב) 
• The fruits from the םינימה תעבש: grapes, figs, pomegranates, olives, dates. 
• Juice/wine made from grapes. 
The הכרב of תושפנ ארוב is said after all other (non-bread) food items. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 44 - 
ד"סב 
Starting & Ending Nusach of  שלש ןיעמ 
Grain 
Fruit 
Starting  
Nusach 
Wine 
היחמה לע 
הלכלכה לעו 
ץעה  
ירפ לעו ץעה לע
ןפגה ירפ לעו ןפגה לע 
Ending  
Nusach 
היחמה לעו ץראה לע 
)הלכלכה לעו( 
תוריפה לעו ץראה לע 
ןפגה ירפ לעו ץראה לע 
On fruits from Eretz Yisroel: 
היתוריפ לעו ץראה לע 
On wine from Eretz Yisroel: 
הנפג ירפ לעו ץראה לע 
When eating from more than one of these categories,  
the nusach for the הכרב is combined. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 45 - 
ד"סב 
Halochos of שלש ןיעמ - 1 
If you ate fruits from the םינימה תעבש along with other fruits,  
the הכרב of שלש ןיעמ counts for all,  
and you do not say a separate תושפנ ארוב on the fruits. 
Similarly, if you drank wine along with other drinks,  
ןפגה לע counts for all,  
and you do not make a separate תושפנ ארוב on the drinks. 
                
If you said תושפנ ארוב instead of שלש ןיעמ,  
you are not אצוי. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 46 - 
ד"סב 
Halochos of שלש ןיעמ - 2 
For the הכרב of שלש ןיעמ,  
you should go back to the place where you ate 
and the הכרב should be said sitting down.  
For  תושפנ ארוב 
you do not need to back to the place where you ate.  
Although you do not need to sit down for תושפנ ארוב,  
the הכרב, like all תוכרב, should be made while stationary. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 47 - 
ד"סב 
Halochos of שלש ןיעמ - 3 
If we ate half a 
כ
תיז of a 
and half a תיזכ of a 
 '
שלש ןיעמ
'תושפ 
נ ארוב
'
'
food,  
food, 
Ashkenazim make a תושפנ ארוב,  
while many Sefardi poskim hold that one would not make a הנורחא הכרב. 
                
The same psakim would apply if one ate  
half of a 
זכ
תי of a grain food which requires an היחמה לע,  
along with half a תיזכ of a םינימה תעבש fruit which requires an ץעה לע. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 48 - 
ד"סב 
Halochos of שלש ןיעמ - 4 
For fruit or wine that comes from לארשי ץרא,  
the ending of the הכרב is  
" 
ה
י
תוריפ לעו ץרא
ה לע
"
and 
"הנפג
 ירפ לעו ץראה לע"
                
On special days – בוט םוי ,שדוח שאר ,תבש –  
. 
we mention a sentence about them  
before continuing with the passage of ביטמו בוט 'ה התא יכ. 
If forgotten, you do not need to repeat שלש ןיעמ. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 49 - 
 ד"סב 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 50 - 
 
 
 שלש ןיעמ תכרב 
This brocho is called  שלָׁש ןיֵעֵמ because it is a summary of the first three brochos of   ב  ר  כ  ה ת ָׁמוֹז ן . 
 
Thank You Hashem for the goodness You give us and for Eretz Yisroel.  
Please have mercy on us and rebuild the Bais Hamikdash.  
 
  'ה הָ ּתַא ְ ךּורָּב ................................ ................................ ... Hashem, You are the source of all blessings 
  םָלֹועָה ְ ךֶׁלֶׁמ ּוני ֵקֹלֱא ................................ ................................ ............... Our G-d, King of the universe  
 
on items from wheat, barley, spelt, rye, oats 
 לַע ,הָלָ ּכְלַ ּכַה לַעְו הָי ְחִ ּמַה ................................ ....................... For the life giving food and sustenance  
on wine or grape juice 
 לַע י ִרְ ּפ לַעְו ן ֶׁפֶׁ ּגַה ,ן ֶׁפֶׁ ּגַה ................................ ................................ . For the vine and the fruit of the vine 
on grapes, pomegranate, dates, figs, or olives  
 ,ץֵעָה י ִרְ ּפ לַעְו ץֵעָה ................................ ................................ ......... On the tree and the fruit of the tree 
 
  ,הֶׁדָ ּ שַה תַבּונ ְּת לַעְו ................................ ................................ .............. And on the produce of the field  
 ,הָבָח ְרּו הָבֹוט ה ָ ּד ְמֶׁח ץ ֶׁרֶׁא לַעְו ................................ ....... And on a precious, good, and spacious land 
  ,ּוני ֵתֹובֲאַל ָ ּתְלַחְנ ִהְו ָתי ִצ ָרֶׁ ׁש ................................ ............. That you desired and gave to our ancestors 
  . ּהָבּו ּט ִמ ַעֹו ּֽ ּב ְ שִלְו ּהָי ְרִ ּפ ִמ לֹוכֱאֶׁל ................. To eat from its fruit and to be satisfied from its goodness 
  ּוני ֵקֹלֱא 'ה אָנ םֵח ַר ................................ ................................ ................... Please have mercy, Hashem 
  , ָ ךֶׁ ּמַע לֵא ָר ְ שִי לַע ................................ ................................ .............................. On Yisroel, Your nation, 
  , ָ ך ֶׁרי ִע םִיַלָ ׁשּורְי לַעְו ................................ ................................ ............ And on Yerushalayim, Your city, 
  , ָ ך ֶׁדֹובְ ּכ ן ַ ּכ ְ ׁשִמ ן ֹוּי ִצ לַעְו ................................ ................... And on Tzion, the resting place of Your glory, 
  ָ ךֶׁחְ ּבְז ִמ לַעְו ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... And on Your Mizbayach, 
  . ָ ךֶׁלָכי ֵה לַעְו ................................ ................................ ............................. And on Your Bais Hamikdash 
 ד"סב 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 51 - 
 
 ,ּוני ֵמָי ְב ה ָרֵהְמִ ּב ׁשֶׁדֹ ּקַה רי ִע םִיַלָשּורְי הֵנ ְבּו ............. And rebuild Yerushalayim Your holy city, quickly, 
 in our days 
  , ּהָכֹותְל ּונֵלֲעַהְו ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... And bring us up to it 
 ּהָנָיְנ ִבְ ּב ּונֵחְ ּמַ שְו ................................ ................................ ..................  And let us rejoice in its rebuilding 
  ּהָי ְרִ ּפ ִמ לַכאֹנ ְו ................................ ................................ ............................. And we will eat from its fruit 
  , ּהָבּו ּטִמ עַ ּב ְ שִנ ְו ................................ ................................ ..... And we will be satisfied from its goodness 
ה ָרֳהָטְבּו הָ ּ ׁשֻּד ְקִ ּב ָהיֶׁלָע ָ ךְכ ֶׁרָבְנּו , ........................ And we will bless You there with holiness and purity, 
 
 ,לֹ ּכַל בי ִטֵמּו בֹוט 'ה הָ ּתַא י ִ ּכ ................................ ........................ For You are good and do good to all 
 ...ץ ֶׁרָאָה לַע ָ ךְ ּל הֶׁדֹונ ְו  * ................................ ................................ ... And we thank you for the land and -     -    -    -    - 
on items from wheat, barley, spelt, rye, oats 
  .הָי ְחִ ּמַה לַעְו ................................ ................................ ............................ And for the food that gives life 
 'ה הָ ּתַא ְ ךּורָּב ................................ ................................ ... Hashem, You are the source of all blessings, 
 הָי ְחִ ּמַה לַעְו ץ ֶׁרָאָה לַע . ................................ ........................... For the land and for the life giving food  
 
on wine or grape juice 
  .ן ֶׁפָ ּגַה י ִרְ ּפ לַעְו ................................ ................................ .............................. And for the fruit of the vine 
 ,'ה הָ ּתַא ְ ךּורָּב ................................ ................................ .. Hashem, You are the source of all blessings, 
ן ֶׁפָ ּגַה י ִרְ ּפ לַעְו ץ ֶׁרָאָה לַע . ................................ .......................... For the land and for the fruit of the vine 
 
on grapes, pomegranate, dates, figs, or olives  
  .תֹורֵ ּפַה לַעְו ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ On the fruits 
  'ה הָ ּתַא ְ ךּורָּב ................................ ................................ .. Hashem, You are the source of all blessings, 
תֹורֵ ּפַה לַעְו ץ ֶׁרָאָה לַע . ................................ ................................ ............. For the land and for the fruits 
 
 
ד"סב 
Halochos of תושפנ ארוב 
תושפנ ארוב is made after eating the required amount of foods  
that are not from the 
םינימה ת 
עבש
and don’t grow from the ground,  
and drinks aside from wine and grape juice. 
                    
One תושפנ ארוב suffices  
if we ate and drank foods and drinks  
that would independently require a תושפנ ארוב. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 52 - 
 ד"סב 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com  - 53 - 
 
תושפנ ארוב תכרב 
On food items other than bread and those above 
 
Hashem, You create all and what they need to survive. 
 
 הָ ּתַא ְ ךּורָּב 'ה  , ................................ ...................... Hashem, You are the source of all blessings, 
 ֹלֱא ֵק  ,םָלֹועָה ְ ךֶׁלֶׁמ ּוני ................................ ................................ .............. Our G-d, King of the universe 
  ,ןָנ ֹורְסֶׁחְו תֹו ּב ַר תֹו ׁשָפְנ א ֵרֹו ּב ............ Who creates many living things and that which they are lacking 
  ) ָת(א ָרָּבֶׁ ׁש הַמ לָ ּכ לַע ................................ ................................ ............. For all that You have created 
  .י ָח לָ ּכ ׁשֶׁפֶׁנ םֶׁהָּב תֹויֲחַהְל ................................ ........................ To sustain the life of every living being 
 .םי ִמָלֹועָה י ֵח ְ ךּורָּב ................................ ............................. You are the Source of the life of the worlds 
 
 

םיקידצ ירופיס 
Captivating stories full of Yiras Shamayim taken from Shmuessin that 
Reb Kalman Krohn z’tl gave in Adelphia Yeshiva 
The Megaleh Amukos  
and Tikkun Chatzos 
Crakcow, 1605 
As the morning sun filtered through the lace 
curtain and filled the room with its yellow light, 
Malka turned over in bed. She opened one eye, 
then the other, and then sat up with a start. Her 
husband’s bed was empty. Not only empty, but 
pristinely made, as if he had never slept in it the 
night before. Her heart pounding, Malka hastily 
washed her hands and threw on a robe. 
“Yitzchok!” She called out worriedly. But there 
was no answer.  
He probably went to shul already, she thought to 
herself. Calm down, Malka.  
Yet she could not calm herself. Dressing quickly, 
she rushed down the block to the home of her 
sister Leah. “Leah?” She called breathlessly, 
knocking urgently on the door. “Open up, Leah!”  
The door opened slowly, and her sister stood 
there, red-eyed. She looked at Malka. “Yitzchok, 
too?” She asked hoarsely.  
“No!” Malka cried. “Don’t tell me Binyomin 
didn’t come home last night either!” 
Leah nodded and blew her nose. “It seems that 
way,” She whispered, looking down at the floor. 
“So where are they?!” Malka practically yelled in 
frustration.  
“I don’t know,” Leah said, and both sisters tried 
to stifle their rising panic. “Let me get my kids 
dressed, and then we’ll go to Tatte and Mama. I 
can’t think straight.” She opened her door wider, 
and Malka stepped inside. 
Yet before she had a chance to close the door, they 
heard horrific screams coming from a few blocks 
down.  
“Go check what is going on,” Leah urged 
fearfully.  
Malka needed no further invitation. She went 
back outside and raced up the street toward the 
sounds of the terrible yelling. She didn’t get too 
far. Her father, R’ Moshe Eberless, came running 
up to her, his face white. “Malkala,” He said, his 
tone anguished.  
“What, Tatte?” She pleaded. “Tell me what 
happened!” 
“The shammas…” R’ Moshe began and then 
choked up. He began guiding his daughter back 
down the road, where they saw Leah and her 
children standing anxiously at their front door.  
“What happened, Tatte?” Malka asked again.  
“The shammas was cleaning the shul and… in a 
small room under the bed…” 
“Yes?” Both of his daughters looked at him, eyes 
wide with fright.  
“Under the bed, he discovered…” R’ Moshe 
began weeping, and he could not continue. 
“Did he find Binyomin and Yitzchok, Tatte?” 
Leah asked urgently. 
“Yes. No.” R’ Moshe managed to say through his 
tears. He swallowed and then blurted out the 
horrible truth. “He found their bodies.” 
“Nooooooo!” The anguished cries of the two 
brand-new almanos pierced the heavens. 
It 
was a terrible tragedy. A terrible, double 
tragedy. Two young men, talmidei chachomim, 
had perished at such a young age, their bodies left 
under a bed in the shul. The double levaya was 
held later that morning, and then the two sisters 
were led to their parents’ home to sit shiva.  
“What… How…?” Malka choked out. “How did 
they die?” 
Her younger sister, Roiza, stroked her shoulder 
comfortingly. Yet Roiza’s young husband 
stepped forward, white-faced, to answer Malka’s 
question, and his words shocked them to the core. 
“It was me,” He said shakily. “It was me. I didn’t 
mean to, by I was the one who killed them.” 
************* 
In the city of Crackow lived an affluent man with 
a keen business sense, R’ Moshe Eberless. In 
addition to being a savvy businessman, R’ Moshe 
was a learned man and a yarei shamayim. More 
than anything, he desired to marry his daughters 
off not just to bnei Torah whom he would support 
generously, yet to genuine talmidei chachomim of 
the highest caliber. His business dealings 
consumed much of his time, and he couldn’t 
personally devote his days to learning. He 
understood that only by acquiring sons-in-law 
who would spend their days and nights toiling 
before their gemaros would Torah remain within 
his generations.  
When he married off his elder daughters, Leah 
and Malka, his merited sons-in-law who fulfilled 
his qualifications. They were both outstanding 
bnei Torah who knew little outside of the world 
of learning. Filled with gratitude to Hashem for 
granting him such sons-in-law, R’ Moshe 
supplied them with every luxury possible, 
allowing them to lead a worry-free existence and 
focus solely on their learning. He made but one 
condition: the two young couples were to join the 
Eberless family for every lunch and supper. 
Nothing gave R’ Moshe more pleasure than 
watching his two respected sons-in-law at the 
table, engrossed in Talmudic discussion. Indeed, 
the sons-in-law complied unhesitatingly to this 
stipulation, grateful for the monetary support so 
generously bestowed upon them.  
And then came the time for Roiza, the third and 
youngest Eberless daughter, to marry. Roiza was 
different then her sisters. While Leah and Malka 
respected limud hatorah and took pride in their 
husbands’ diligence, essentially, they were still 
the daughters of an upper-class home, with a 
wealthy wardrobe and wealthy needs to match. 
Roiza was different. The luxury and splendor that 
she grew up amidst had absolutely no value in her 
eyes. She was a refined and modest girl, wise 
beyond her years, who took pleasure only from 
spirituality, from deeds that would retain their 
value for eternity. She held her two brothers-in
law in high esteem, yet for herself, she wanted 
more. She wanted a husband who was not just an 
outstanding Torah scholar, but someone who was 
completely detached from materialism, someone 
who was entirely pure, someone who was wholly 
entrenched in his learning.   
Her sisters would tease her about her extreme 
piety, and poked good naturedly at her lofty 
ideals, yet Roiza held firm. All of olam hazeh, 
including her sisters’ gentle taunting, meant 
nothing to her. All she wanted was someone who 
dedicated his life entirely for Hashem. 
Shidduchim were suggested, one after the other. 
Dedicated bnei Torah, erudite scholars with yiras 
Shamayim. Truly wonderful young men, yet not 
enough for Roiza.  
After some months of fruitless searching for a 
shidduch for Roiza Eberless, the townspeople 
discovered a bochur learning diligently in a small 
shul in town. His threadbare clothing attested to 
his astute poverty, and he was hardly more than 
skin and bones, yet no one could deny that he was 
something special. There was an otherworldly 
glow to his thin, pure face as he sat from morning 
to night, and then from night to morning, 
immersed in the sweet sounds of Torah and 
avodah. He rarely left the shul, other than to tovel 
in the river. Once a day, he would eat some 
crumbs, maybe a chicken wing, to give him 
strength to continue. Other than that, he would 
sway before his Gemara practically nonstop.  
Observing this holy young man, day in, day out, 
inspired one of the villagers to think of a shidduch 
for him. “He’s a perfect match for Roiza 
Eberless!” The villager declared before hurrying 
to R’ Moshe’s home to discuss his brainstorm. R’ 
Moshe came to the shul to observe the young man 
personally, and was impressed by what he saw. 
The rail-thin young man was definitely what his 
daughter was looking for. He gave his consent, 
and the bochur was approached. He looked up 
from his Gemara just long enough to hear the 
matchmaker’s proposal and then agreed to the 
match. He scarcely wished his brand-new father
in-law 
mazel 
tov before returning his 
concentration to the text before him.  
Roiza, the fresh kallah, shone with joy as she 
listened to her father speak about her new 
chosson’s unmatchable hasmadah and pure 
holiness.  And indeed, the chosson, Nosson Nota 
Shapiro, was the fulfillment of her lofty dreams.  
Right from the very beginning of their marriage, 
she sensed that his greatness ran deeper than her 
father and the townspeople had observed. Each 
night, including the night of their wedding, 
Nosson Nota would slip out of the house 
immediately following chatzos, and his young 
wife would watch him surreptitiously from 
behind half-closed eyelids as he returned shortly 
before daybreak. In the morning, he would 
pretend he had been in his bed all night, 
innocently sleeping. She would watch him rush 
out to the first morning minyan after immersing 
himself in the frigid waters of the river and then 
head straight for the bais medrash, where he 
would sit and concentrate for hours until nightfall. 
And Roiza knew she had merited to marry a true 
tzaddik.  
Being such an elevated person came with a price, 
however. Unlike the two older sons-in-law, 
Binyomin and Yitzchok, Nosson Nota found it 
impossible to comply with his father-in-law’s 
stipulation that he eat his main meals in the 
Eberless home. On the first afternoon of their 
marriage, R’ Moshe sat at the head of the dining 
room table, eagerly awaiting the brand-new 
couple. Recognizing his new son-in-law’s 
greatness, he had toiled over a sugya the night 
before, searching for a dazzling kasha to present 
to Nosson Nota. Leah and Malka soon arrived 
along with their husbands, and then newlywed 
Roiza took her place at the table. But Nosson Nota 
was nowhere to be found.  
“Where’s Nosson Nota?” R’ Moshe asked his 
daughter in surprise. 
“If he’s such a tzaddik, let him be a mentch and 
honor his shver,” Leah muttered under her breath.  
Roiza blushed, but did not reply.  
“Where’s Nosson Nota?” R’ Moshe asked a few 
moments later, disappointment written all over 
his round face. The family had already washed 
and begun their meal, yet the newest son-in-law 
still had yet to appear.  
“Nosson Nota is in shamayim,” Yitzchok said, 
and Roiza’s cheeks reddened even more. It was 
true. 
While he learned, Nosson Nota’s 
concentration was so total that he did not see, 
R’ Moshe could not understand, but he knew it 
hear, or notice anything in his surroundings. It 
was as if his lofty soul was truly in heaven, 
learning amongst the angels.  
As time went on, the family’s expectations of 
Nosson Nota changed, yet their attitude did not 
soften much. Roiza’s older sisters, who felt 
slightly put down that their own husbands 
couldn’t measure up to their young brother-in
law’s elevated heights, thought that Nosson Nota 
was stepping on too many people in his quest to 
become a tzaddik.  
Disgruntled at their brother-in-law’s startling lack 
of manners, and more than a bit jealous, the two 
elder sisters went to complain to their father. “My 
husband is just as big a talmid chacham as 
Roiza’s, and yet he is also a mentch who doesn’t 
snub his father-in-law,” Malka said earnestly, as 
Leah nodded along. “Who does Nosson Nota 
Shapiro think he is, exactly?” 
Presented with the facts so starkly, R’ Moshe had 
to agree that there was substance to their 
grievance. Why couldn’t Nosson Nota sit at the 
Shabbos table for more than a few minutes? Did 
he really need to skip every family gathering? 
Wasn’t bein adam lachaveiro also important? And 
this was besides the fact that Nosson Nota was 
being supported by his father-in-law. Where was 
his decency? Annoyed, R’ Moshe confronted in 
his daughter and said, “As his wife, it is your 
responsibility to make sure your husband 
understands the importance of the entire family 
living in harmony.” 
Roiza listened to her father respectfully, and then 
began to beg him for leniency. She knew she 
married a true tzaddik, and that Nosson Nota was 
simply too disconnected from this world to waste 
so much time on mundane matters such as eating 
a leisurely meal. “Please, Tatte,” She begged. 
“Please let him be. My husband is truly special, 
and this is how it has to be. Please try to 
understand.” 
would be useless to try to press his point further. 
Nosson Nota was Nosson Nota, and he wouldn’t 
be coming to the family meals. He sighed and 
resolved to get used to the fact.  
Despite the hesitant truce between R’ Moshe and 
Nosson Nota, the two older brothers-in-law, 
Binyomin and Yitzchok were not ready to just let 
Nosson Nota be. Goaded on by their wives, they 
decided to trail their young brother-in-law at night 
to see where he went.  
One night, they hid stealthily behind a tall oak tree 
and watched as Nosson Nota slipped out of his 
home, stopped to check his surroundings for 
potential observers, and then moving hurriedly 
down the street when he was assured there was no 
one else around. Keeping a considerable distance 
between them, the two older men tiptoed after 
him as he led them further and further away from 
the village center toward the icy river.  
When he reached the river, Nosson Nota 
immersed himself in its frigid waters one time, 
then another and another. At last, he emerged 
from the river, shivering and unsuccessfully 
choking back tears. The two men exchanged a 
quick glance, but there was no time to ponder 
further, because Nosson Nota was already 
hurrying away from the river. They continued to 
shadow him back into town, where he entered a 
small shul and locked himself inside.  
Seeing that they would be unable to gain entry 
into the shul, Binyomin and Yitzchok hung 
around outside, straining their ears to try to 
ascertain what Nosson Nota was doing inside. 
They heard sobbing, deep, anguished sobbing, 
and then they could make out the words of tikkun 
chatzos. Again, they exchanged a glance. So this 
was what Nosson Nota was doing! He was saying 
tikkun chatzos, and the two men, who were 
tzaddikim in their own right, had to admit that his 
anguished wailing was sincere. Impressed and 
intrigued, they decided to hide in the shul a few 
nights later so that they would be able to observe 
their brother-in-law as he recited tikkun chatzos.  
For his part, Nosson Nota Shapiro was no fool. 
He realized that his father-in-law and brothers-in
law were carefully observing his every move. 
They were scrutinizing the way he davened, the 
way he learned. And he had caught sight of the 
two men trailing him when he went on his 
midnight outing.  
“Roiza,” He told his wife later that day. “Please 
tell your sisters that it is sakanas nefashos for 
anyone to be in the room when I say tikkun 
chatzos. They should tell their husbands to be 
careful and not to come into the room. It’s 
dangerous.” 
His wife looked at him hesitantly. “I’m 
embarrassed to tell that to my sisters,” She said 
uncomfortably. “Knowing them, they’ll just 
laugh at me.” 
“You have to tell them,” Nosson Nota said 
urgently. “It’s truly a matter of life and death. 
They are playing with their lives. They must not 
come into the room.” 
With no other choice, Roiza set out to do her 
husband’s bidding. As expected, her sisters 
treated her words as one big laughing matter, but 
they agreed to pass the message on to their 
husbands. Binyomin and Yitzchok, too, did not 
take the message seriously. “Sakanas nefashos? 
Don’t be silly. He just wants to scare us off.” 
A few days later, shortly before chatzos, the 
brothers-in-law crept into the shul that Nosson 
Nota frequented at night. Their young brother-in
law, it seemed, had made arrangements with the 
shammas to rent a small room in the shul.  The 
men tiptoed cautiously into the small room and 
looked around. The room was bare, save for a 
rickety bed in the corner, and a small table against 
a wall. The table was empty besides for a few 
candles and a sackcloth.  
The brothers-in-law heard light footsteps, and 
they realized Nosson Nota had arrived. Hastily, 
they dove under the bed and huddled there 
silently, hardly daring to breathe. Peeking out 
from beneath the bed, they saw him enter the 
room and lock the door behind him. Crying softly, 
he pulled off his shirt and donned the sackcloth, 
rubbing ashes onto his forehead. Then he 
collapsed on the floor and began weeping bitterly 
as he began reciting tikkun chatzos.  
His righteousness, his greatness was such that a 
tremendous force of pure holiness filled the room 
as he lay on the floor, sobbing. The two men, in 
their hideout under the bed, simply could not bear 
the overwhelming kedushah, and after a short 
while, both men returned their souls to their 
Maker.  
Nosson Nota, still in midst of weeping with 
tremendous concentration, did not notice a thing. 
When he concluded tikkun chatzos, he sat down 
by the table, depleted of all strength. When he 
finally got back to himself, he got up, removed the 
sack, and went back to his home to catch a half
hour of sleep before he was to rise to begin his 
early-morning seder. 
When morning dawned and the two sisters 
noticed their husbands were missing, they 
panicked. Yet nothing could compare to the 
intense fright of the shul’s shammas. He mopped 
the floor vigorously as he prepared the main bais 
medrash for shacharis and then moved on to the 
small room in the back of the shul. Humming, he 
pushed his mop across the floor and then lifted the 
bedspread to clean under the bed.  
“Aaaaahhh!” He yelled, jumping back and 
clutching his chest. There were eyes peering out 
at him from beneath the bed. Bravely, he took a 
step closer to investigate and then sprung 
backwards a second time. “Aaaaahhh!” He cried 
hysterically. “Bodies!!! Heeeeeelp!” 
Worried townspeople living nearby came 
hurrying in, and they soon added their screams to 
the chorus. “Meisim! Dead bodies in the shul! 
Heeeeelp!” 
“Who are they?” A tall man asked worriedly, 
trying to peer over the crowd. 
“Does anyone recognize them?” Someone else 
called out, not daring to look himself.  
“It’s Binyomin! And isn’t that Yitzchok?!” A 
portly villager cried out despondently. “R’ Moshe 
Ebereless’s two older sons-in-law!” 
In the ensuing mayhem, people rushed about, 
informing the relatives, organizing the levayah, 
trying to ascertain under whose bed the bodies 
were found and who had caused their deaths. 
After a tear-ridden levayah, the two grief-stricken 
sisters went to their parents’ home to sit shiva 
over their young husbands. Their family, grieving 
and bereft, surrounded them, and Nosson Nota 
tearfully admitted his guilt. He had warned his 
brothers-in-law not to follow him, and he hadn’t 
even noticed that they had disobeyed his warning 
and were in the room with him, yet he blamed 
himself for their deaths.  
The next morning, Nosson Nota informed his 
young wife that he was going into exile to try to 
atone for causing the deaths of these two young 
talmidei chachamim. He planned to wander from 
place to place and suffer through instability, 
homelessness, and poverty for an entire year.  
“Nosson Nota, don’t,” His wife pleaded. “You are 
so thin and frail. Who will take care of you? Isn’t 
it 
enough that my sisters had to lose their 
husbands? I am afraid I will lose you, too.” 
But saddled with the guilt of his brothers-in-law’s 
tragic demise, her husband could not be swayed. 
“I give you my word that I will return after a 
year,” He promised earnestly. “Please don’t tell 
anyone that I went.” 
And as Leah and Malka sat shiva in the Eberless 
home, Nosson Nota and his wife parted, tearfully.  
Word trickled out amongst the townspeople that 
Nosson Nota had been present in the room when 
the tragedy had occurred. Tongues wagged and 
lips chattered, and the story mutated over and 
over as it passed from mouth to mouth. The 
versions were plentiful, and it was hard to 
differentiate truth from fact. Was he there? Did he 
do something? Everyone had a different opinion, 
and they intended to ask their suspect himself. 
They would push Nosson Nota against the wall 
and force the truth out of him.  
However, when they arrived at the shiva home for 
shacharis the next morning, the third Eberless 
son-in-law was nowhere to be found.  
Roiza, sitting in the women’s section near her 
sisters, suddenly found herself accosted by 
throngs of villagers. “Where is your husband?” 
They demanded.  
“I don’t know,” She replied softly, truthfully. Her 
husband had gone into galus, and she had no idea 
of his whereabouts.  
Yet they would not relent. “Where is Nosson 
Nota?” They demanded again.  
“I don’t know!” She reiterated, near tears. “I 
really don’t know where he is!” The enormity of 
the situation fell on her like a load of bricks, and 
she began sobbing. Her two beloved sisters were 
now young almanos. Her own husband had 
disappeared. Her life was in shambles.  
The tongues of the gossipmongers continued to 
wag. Not only did Nosson Nota murder his two 
brothers-in-law, but he also ran away from the 
crime scene and escaped justice. “Your third son
in-law, who killed the other two, has escaped,” 
The villagers informed a distraught R’ Moshe 
Eberless.  
R’ Moshe, grieving over the loss of his two older 
sons-in-law, found it difficult to swallow this 
piece of news. “Where is he? Find him! We need 
to get to the bottom of this! Where did he go?”  
With a heavy heart, R’ Moshe sat down to 
compose a letter. In it, he described the painful 
tragedy that had befallen his family. And then my 
third son-in-law ran away, he wrote in his large 
scrawl. He is missing, and we currently have no 
knowledge of his whereabouts. I am afraid my 
daughter will be an agunah. His name is Nosson 
Nota Shapiro. He is a man of medium build, 
terribly thin, and his beard is sparse. He’s twenty 
years old, but he looks more like a bar mitzvah 
boy. He’s a tremendous masmid who spends all 
his time learning. If you find him, please use your 
authority to command him to return home.  
R’ Moshe mailed copies of the letter to rabbanim 
throughout Poland, hoping that they would come 
across his missing son-in-law and send him back 
to Crackow. He also hired messengers to travel 
from town to town, searching for Nosson Nota. 
The story spread like wildfire throughout Europe.  
*** 
Wandering from village to village on the Polish 
countryside, R’ Nosson Nota Shapiro tried to 
atone for the tragedy that he had been responsible 
for. He was ridden with guilt that his tikkun 
chatzos had caused the deaths of two close 
relatives. He would fast for days at a time, as his 
wife had feared, immersing himself in Torah and 
avodah almost around the clock. Only when his 
strength waned almost to the point of total 
collapse would he agree to accept a bit of bread 
from a kind villager.  
Realizing that his father-in-law was searching for 
him, R’ Nosson Nota would remain away from 
crowds. He would daven in small, out-of-the-way 
shtieblach, where he was less concerned about 
people recognizing him. To fulfill his self
sentence of galus, he would never sleep in the 
same shtiebel twice and was therefore constantly 
on the go. However, due to his constant fasting, 
he was extremely weak. His wife back home 
would have thought it impossible, yet he grew 
considerably thinner than he had already been, 
until he presented but a skeletal figure. And still, 
he plowed onwards, moving from village to 
village while feasting on the holy words of Torah, 
all the while barely feeding his body.  
After a few weeks of this, Elul arrived. R’ Nosson 
Nota had reached a point where his physical body 
was ready to give way and let its Master reclaim 
its soul. He was completed depleted, and he knew 
that if he would continue on in this vein, he would 
surely die. He sat in a small shtiebel, swaying 
weakly before his Gemara as he reached 
enormous levels of kedushah, with barely any 
strength to lift his finger to turn the page when he 
reached the end of the amud.  
Suddenly, a thought entered his mind. “Lulav and 
esrog!” He cried out. What was he going to do 
about lulav and esrog here in galus, when he had 
absolutely nothing, not even the strength to lift his 
finger? The thought caught him off guard. Galus, 
chumros, those were very nice, but lulav and 
esrog was a mitzvah that he was required to do! 
R’ Nosson Nota was well-versed in the halachos 
of arbah minim, and he cherished the mitzvah 
dearly.  
At once, he made up his mind to remain in the 
village where he was, at least until after Sukkos. 
In his weakened state, traveling again would 
almost certainly mean death. Mustering up 
forgotten dregs of energy, he walked into town 
and approached the village gabbai to request a 
place to stay.  
The gabbai took one look at him, all skin and 
bones, with glowing eyes, and he understood that 
Appreciative that his host did not press him 
this was no ordinary person. “Please, can I first 
give you something to eat and drink?” He offered. 
“Thank you, I would appreciate that,” R’ Nosson 
Nota replied gratefully.  
The gabbai led him inside the house and showed 
him to the table, where he was served a meal. R’ 
Nosson Nota, however, drank just a bit of tea and 
ate a small piece of fish. Then he put down his 
fork, sated.  
“You must eat more,” The gabbai urged. “You 
look malnourished. It’s dangerous.” 
“I’m sorry, but I simply do not have the energy to 
eat anything more,” R’ Nosson Nota replied 
weakly. “Please, do you think there is a place in 
town where I can sleep?” 
Recognizing his guest’s greatness, the gabbai 
wrote him a nice letter of recommendation and 
sent him to the home of R’ Efraim, the wealthiest 
individual in town.  
R’ Nosson Nota walked slowly on his spindly legs 
until he reached the large, palatial home of R’ 
Efraim. Knocking softly on the door, he asked to 
speak to the master of the house and was shown 
to R’ Efraim’s study. He gave over the note he 
had received from the gabbai and then 
respectfully requested a place to stay.  
R’ Efraim was not just a wealthy man; he was also 
a talmid chacham. Reading the note from the 
gabbai, he understood that R’ Nosson Nota was 
someone special, and he was eager to host him. 
“What is your name?” He requested.  
R’ Nosson Nota’s cheeks reddened and he 
stuttered and stammered, trying to figure out how 
to reply without compromising on his anonymity.  
“It’s alright,” R’ Efraim said kindly. “If you don’t 
feel comfortable, you don’t have to tell me. Here, 
let me show you to your room.” 
further, R’ Nosson Nota followed R’ Efraim to a 
beautifully decorated guest room. He lay his 
weary frame on the bed, and within seconds, he 
was soundly asleep.  
Yet not for long.  
A mere half-hour later, he awoke, washed, and 
immediately resumed learning from where he had 
left off earlier that day. His sweet Gemara niggun 
filled the air throughout the entire night. 
In the morning, his host interrupted his learning. 
“Would you like to join me for shacharis?” 
R’ Nosson Nota stood up hastily. “Of course! But 
I daven at the smallest shtiebel, the one on the 
outskirts of town.” 
“Why?” R’ Efraim asked in surprise. “Isn’t it 
much more preferable to daven with a crowd in a 
large shul? As it is stated, ‘Brov am hadras 
melech’.” 
His guest looked extremely discomfited. “You’re 
right,” He said quietly. “But is it okay with you if 
I go to the small shtiebel?” 
Again, R’ Efraim assumed his guest must be a 
troubled individual, and decided not push him. “I 
will be davening in the main bais medrash, but 
you are welcome to daven wherever you like. 
Please come back here afterward, because I will 
be waiting to give you breakfast.”  
R’ Efraim found his guest intriguing, and he was 
looking forward to get to know him better. When 
R’ Nosson Nota returned after shacharis, he found 
a beautifully set table laden with food. Despite his 
resolution to cease fasting, food meant little to 
him, and he ate a few crumbs, just enough to give 
him life for another day.  
Sitting across from him, his host tried to draw 
information out of him, but when he saw his 
reticent guest would not, or perhaps could not, 
reply, he gave up. Instead, R’ Efraim told over 
one of his original Torah thoughts. R’ Nosson 
Nota appreciated it, and then added on to it, 
impressing his host. R’ Efraim deduced that he 
must be a hidden tzaddik and began treating him 
with real respect.  
R’ Nosson Nota spent the entire day in his room, 
learning and learning. He declined lunch, and 
turned down the invitation for supper, opting to 
busy himself with only matters of kedushah. He 
requested, and received, permission to come and 
go as he pleased.  
The next day, he approached his host to inquire 
about a lulav and esrog. “What are you planning 
on doing about arbah minim?” 
R’ Efraim smiled broadly. “Boruch Hashem, I 
already have a lulav and esrog,” He explained.  
His guest’s eyes lit up excitedly. “Would I be able 
to see them?” He asked eagerly. 
R’ Efraim led his guest to the breakfront and 
removed a beautiful silver box. From the box, he 
took out a wrapped bundle and carefully began to 
peel away the layers before proudly displaying 
the esrog.  
“Wow,” Nosson Nota breathed, squinting at the 
esrog from all sides. It was truly a beautiful fruit. 
He then examined the lulav that his host held out 
and was equally impressed. “They are both 
magnificent,” He exclaimed. 
R’ Efraim beamed, glad his guest understood how 
beautiful his lulav and esrog truly were. “Would 
you like to use my arbah minim on Sukkos?” He 
offered generously, and R’ Nosson Nota 
gratefully accepted.  
“I see you are a talmid chacham?” R’ Efraim 
prodded, trying to get him to open up.  
“I wish I was a talmid chacham,” R’ Nosson Nota 
responded, shrugging. “But I do know that your 
lulav and esrog are one of a kind. Are you also 
building a sukkah?” 
“Most definitely,” R’ Efraim confirmed. “In fact, 
although it is only the beginning of Elul, we are 
already in the process of building the sukkah. 
Would you like to come see it?” 
“Sure,” R’ Nosson Nota replied.  
The two men walked out together toward the 
expansive yard. A few sukkah boards were 
already standing, with many more lying nearby. 
Nosson Nota ran his fingers over the rich wood. 
“R’ Efraim, when putting up this wall, perhaps 
you should do it like this?” He proceeded to 
demonstrate.  
He didn’t have to say that his instructions were 
according to a specific shitah; his host recognized 
he was a talmid chacham and understood this on 
his 
own. “Sure, no problem,” R’ Efraim 
responded agreeably.  
R’ Nosson Nota then offered another comment, 
and then a few more, incorporating various shittos 
to ensure the sukkah would be built with every 
possible chumrah. His host amiably agreed to all 
his suggestions.  
Later, after R’ Nosson Nota retired to his room to 
learn, R’ Efraim mused about his interesting 
guest. It was clear he was a tremendous talmid 
chacham who was well-versed in lulav and esrog, 
in sukkah. He was also an incredible masmid. It 
was likely that he was someone very special. 
However, he refused to divulge his name and also 
tried to minimize showing his vast knowledge. 
But R’ Efraim was okay with it. He was happy to 
share his home and his possessions with this 
special, if anonymous, guest.  
As the weeks went by, however, his feelings 
began to change. His guest had been by him for 
silver from thieves. I will give you the key, but 
almost a month and half. Granted, he barely 
consumed any food, yet he lived in the house and 
utilized 
his 
possessions. He had various 
idiosyncrasies that were catered to without 
question, such as davening in the small shtiebel, 
and leaving the house in the middle of the night. 
R’ Efraim cherished the mitzvah of hachnasas 
orchim, yet he had to admit that he was getting 
annoyed by his guest’s behavior. Despite living 
off of R’ Efraim’s largesse for so many weeks, he 
refused to answer any personal questions. He 
didn’t show a single sign of leaving. Was he 
planning on moving in permanently? R’ Efraim 
didn’t want to chase him out, but he began to hope 
that he would leave soon.  
Erev Sukkos arrived. In towns all over Poland, 
men were putting the final touches on their 
sukkahs while their children finished decorating 
the interior of their temporary abodes. Women 
stood on their feet in the kitchen, mixing and 
grating, cooking and baking, churning out dish 
after dish for yom tov.  
Shortly before yom tov, R’ Efraim met R’ Nosson 
Nota in the hallway and noticed that his face had 
an unusual glow. “You look very happy,” He 
commented. “Is there a reason why?” 
“Tonight is Sukkos,” His guest replied joyfully, 
as if stating the obvious. Of course he was happy. 
Sukkos was here! He turned to his host with a 
question of his own. “R’ Efraim, would you mind 
if I slept in your sukkah tonight?” 
R’ Efraim hesitated for a moment. “I would love 
for you to sleep in my sukkah,” He began slowly. 
“There’s one small problem. I am a wealthy man, 
and I own an array of gold and silver objects. I 
beautify my sukkah and show my respect for it by 
displaying these objects inside. Therefore, my 
sukkah is always locked when I am not inside it.” 
He was quiet for another moment, thinking. “You 
can sleep in the sukkah. But please, when you 
leave the sukkah, it is imperative that you 
remember to lock the door to protect my gold and 
you must not forget.” 
R’ Nosson Nota grasped his hands in gratitude. 
“Thank you,” He whispered emotionally. “You 
cannot imagine how much this means to me.” 
When R’ Nosson Nota entered the sukkah on the 
first night of yom tov, his face shone like he was 
on fire. He was a man who genuinely understood 
the greatness of being in a sukkah. He truly felt as 
if he was in the shadow of Hashem, and he 
appreciated every moment. When he made 
kiddush, it was apparent to R’ Efraim and the 
entire family that their guest was no ordinary 
person.  
After the festive yom tov meal, R’ Efraim 
provided his nameless guest with a key to the 
sukkah and repeated his firm instructions that the 
sukkah be locked whenever it was empty, even if 
it was just for a few moments. “Should I bring you 
a bed?” He asked in concern on his way out.  
“No, don’t worry about me,” R’ Nosson Nota 
replied. “I don’t plan on sleeping much.” He took 
the key his host provided and placed it next to him 
on the table. 
As soon as R’ Efraim left the sukkah and closed 
the door behind him, R’ Nosson Nota began to 
work on opening his heart to truly connect with 
the Shechinah. He swayed back and forth, as he 
went through various kabbalistic rituals. He 
concentrated intently on actually feeling 
Hashem’s embrace through the four walls of the 
sukkah. His eyes closed, his concentration total, 
R’ Nosson Nota was truly in a different, purer, 
better world.   
It was an open secret that R’ Efraim, the town’s 
gvir, decorated his sukkah with his many gold and 
silver vessels. A band of thieves decided to utilize 
this information to try to lay their hands on some 
of the riches. They assumed that a flimsy sukkah 
couldn’t be all that secure.  
R’ Nosson Nota’s eyes fluttered open abruptly, 
In the dead of the night, they crept up to the 
wooden sukkah and carefully turned the door 
handle. To their excitement, it gave way. One of 
the thieves pushed the door open soundlessly and 
peered inside. Was the owner of the sukkah 
present? Or was it safe to attempt the heist?  
“Look!” The thief whispered to his friends. There 
was a lone man sitting in the sukkah. However, 
his eyes were closed and he appeared to be in a 
world of his own.  
“Quick! Before he wakes up!” The robber chief 
commanded, stuffing an empty sack into the 
hands of a tall, lanky accomplice. “Fill up the 
sack, boys.” 
The thieves tiptoed past R’ Nosson Nota and 
began looting the sukkah, taking everything of 
value. Then, they left as stealthily as they had 
appeared, closing the door gently behind them. R’ 
Nosson Nota, still in shamayim, didn’t notice a 
thing.  
In the morning, R’ Efraim’s springing footsteps 
sounded outside the sukkah as he approached it 
with his lulav and esrog, ready to make the 
brachah. He entered the wooden structure, looked 
around, and gasped in shock. All his gold, all his 
silver, everything of value had completely 
vanished. And sitting in middle of the painfully 
bare sukkah was his nameless guest, swaying 
back and forth with his eyes squeezed shut.  
R’ Efraim walked up to his guest and brought his 
face mere inches away from the other man. 
“Thief!” He cried accusingly.  
and he jumped in his seat, looking dazed. 
“Wh..wh..what?” 
“Thief!” R’ Efraim repeated, his voice loud and 
harsh. He lifted his hand and delivered a ringing 
slap to his guest’s cheek. “After all I did for you!” 
He continued, his voice trembling. “I took you in, 
I gave you a home, for weeks! And you, not only 
do you refuse to tell me your name, you pay me 
back with irresponsibility! Thief!” His hand 
reached out a second time and delivered another 
smack to R’ Nosson Nota’s flaming cheeks.  
R’ Nosson Nota looked around and realized that 
his host was correct. The gold and silver objects 
that had graced the sukkah were all gone. When 
had it happened? He had been it the sukkah the 
entire time and he had not noticed anyone! He 
bore the degrading blows stoically. 
However, he suddenly realized that his host’s 
anger might endanger his ability to preform the 
mitzvah of arbah minim. Blows he could handle, 
but losing out on arbah minim? That was too 
much. Tears filled his eyes, and he pleaded with 
his host, “I’m terribly sorry for causing you such 
a tremendous loss. I understand that you are angry 
with me. But please, please, don’t deny me the 
zechus of using your lulav and esrog!” 
R’ Efraim didn’t honor him with a response. He 
simply turned on his heel and left the sukkah, 
carrying his arbah minim.  
R’ Nosson Nota jumped up and followed him, his 
eyes never leaving the precious objects in host’s 
hands as they made their way toward the main 
shul, where R’ Efraim would be davening. 
Although R’ Nosson Nota had been careful to 
avoid big shuls, he now had no choice. If he 
wanted the lulav and esrog, he would have to 
daven wherever R’ Efraim decided.  
R’ Efraim, who was still seething with anger, did 
not exchange a single word with his guest for the 
first two days of yom tov. However, on both days, 
when the minyan reached Hallel, R’ Efraim 
swallowed his deep resentment and allowed his 
guest to use the lulav and esrog. His eyes shining, 
emotion stamped across his features, R’ Nosson 
Nota recited the brachos and shook the arbah 
minim.  
Their cold war lasted only as long as yom tov 
lasted. On the first day of Chol Hamoed, R’ 
Efraim informed his guest that he was taking him 
to the rav to sort out what had occurred and to 
determine if his guest was responsible for the 
tremendous 
damage. 
immediately complied.  
R’ 
Nosson 
Nota 
The two men entered the rav’s study and were 
invited to sit down. However, before R’ Efraim 
could even begin speaking, the rav excused 
himself and left the room. Something about the 
guest R’ Efraim had brought reminded him of the 
letter he had received regarding a missing person. 
He reached into his drawer and reread the letter. 
It was about a young man on an extremely 
elevated level who had disappeared after his 
brothers-in-law had perished from something in 
which he had been involved. The description of 
the young man sounded very similar to the man 
currently sitting in his study. Thoughtfully, the 
rav put back the letter and rejoined the two men.  
“How can I help you?” The rav asked, smiling 
warmly at the two men.  
R’ Efraim lost no time listing his grievances. “I 
took him in, I gave him food, I gave him a place 
to stay. For a month and half, he lives off of me. 
He won’t even tell me his name. I asked him only 
one thing: to be careful while spending time in my 
sukkah that thieves don’t get to my valuables. 
One thing I asked of him! And that one thing he 
couldn’t do! All my valuables are gone. It’s not 
the money that bothers me so much, it’s the lack 
of decency. Where is his menchlichkeit?” 
The rav listened carefully and then nodded. “If 
you’ll excuse us, R’ Efraim, I would like to speak 
to your guest privately in the next room.” He 
stood up and motioned to R’ Nosson Nota to 
follow him.  
In the next room, the rav handed R’ Nosson Nota 
the letter, and it took the young man only a 
moment to recognize the handwriting. It was 
written by his father-in-law. He read the letter 
quickly, his face not betraying anything that was 
happening in his mind.  
“R’ Yid,” The Rav said gently after R’ Nosson 
Nota returned the letter. “Are you by any chance 
the missing person in the letter?” 
R’ Nosson Nota didn’t want to deny it, yet he 
certainly could not admit it either. He chose the 
only other option available, and remained silent.  
“As Rav, I am using my authority to command 
you to reply,” The rav said, his tone stern but his 
smile warm and friendly. “Are you the young man 
in the letter?” 
R’ Nosson Nota looked the rav in the eye. “I am,” 
He admitted quietly.   
“Tell me what happened,” The rav said. Seeing 
that R’ Nosson Nota was attempting to evade the 
question, he reiterated his authority as rav and 
commanded him to respond. “You must tell me. 
What happened to your brothers-in-law? Why did 
you disappear?” 
“I had two older brothers-in-law,” R’ Nosson 
Nota began reluctantly. “There was some… 
animosity, perhaps jealously, between us. They 
followed me and hid in the room when I said 
tikkun chatzos. I had no idea they were there. 
Maybe I was wrong. Perhaps I shouldn’t have 
said tikkun chatzos since I knew they were 
curious. It’s too dangerous.” 
“Dangerous?” The rav asked skeptically. “I also 
say tikkun chatzos. It’s not dangerous.” 
Tears began to stream out of R’ Nosson Nota’s 
eyes. “Does the rav understand what tikkun 
chatzos is?” He asked through his tears. “Tikkun 
chatzos! The shechina is in exile!” At this point, 
the young man was swaying forward and 
backward. “What is tikkun chatzos? As you cry 
with your entire being for the shechina, your 
neshama disconnects from its body until it flies up 
to shamayim. There, you can hear the malachim, 
the chayos hakodesh, crying bitterly for the 
shechina. When you say tikkun chatzos, the 
malachim are with you and you cry together with 
them. You no longer have a body, you no longer 
are a body. You are crying with the malachim.”  
R’ Nosson Nota looked at the rav. “Most people 
simply can’t bear such an overload of kedushah. 
It’s sakanas nefashos for them to be present when 
this happens. I warned my brothers-in-law not to 
come, and they didn’t heed my warning. They 
came, and they died. I warned them! I didn’t 
know they were there! I did not intend for this to 
happen. It isn’t my fault.” 
The rav gazed at R’ Nosson Nota with fresh eyes. 
“And R’ Efraim?” He asked softly. “What 
happened in R’ Efraim’s sukkah?”  
“Honored rav, I’ll be honest,” R’ Nosson Nota 
replied. “I’m not really sure what happened. I was 
sitting in the sukkah the entire time, just soaking 
in the tremendous kedushah. I was lost in my 
thoughts, and I simply didn’t notice anything. Not 
the passage of time, not the howling winds. I 
certainly did not notice thieves coming in and 
making off with the gold and silver.” 
“Can you tell me what kind of kavanos you were 
having in the sukkah?” The rav asked curiously. 
“Does the rav understand what a sukkah is? A 
sukkah!” R’ Nosson Nota exclaimed. “In the 
sukkah, we are in the shadow of the shechina 
itself! If you look properly, you can actually see 
Hashem’s Name in the four walls of the sukkah. 
In the sukkah, the only kavanos a person can have 
is regarding the sheimos of Hashem. What was I 
thinking about? How can a person think of 
anything else besides Hashem?” 
The rav was stunned by his reply. Sitting before 
him was no ordinary man, but a malach Hashem! 
“R’ Nosson Nota,” He said respectfully. “Please 
remain with me until after yom tov. After yom 
tov, we will go together to Crackow, back to your 
wife and family, and then I want you to return 
here to become the rav of this city.” 
The rav stood up and went back to his study, 
where R’ Efraim was looking into a sefer as he 
waited. “R’ Efraim,” The rav announced. “I want 
you to realize that the person you were zoche to 
host is a true angel. What a zchus you had!” 
“What is the rav saying?” R’ Efraim asked in 
confusion.  
“Don’t you understand who your guest is?” The 
rav asked. “He’s a walking sefer Torah. He’s one 
of the greatest mekubalim of our generation. And 
he’s so young!” The rav then proceeded to 
recount his conversation with R’ Nosson Nota to 
his astonished congregant.  
R’ Efraim bit his lip in dismay. “I smacked him 
twice,” He whispered, his face white. “Such an 
extraordinary individual, and I hit him twice!” 
Taking leave of the rav, he ran after his guest to 
beg him for forgiveness. “Please, R’ Yid,” He 
begged. “Forgive me! I didn’t realize… I should 
have never hit you.” 
His young guest regarded him, a distressed look 
in his eyes. “You should know, R’ Efraim,” He 
said softly. “After you hit me the first time, there 
was a terrible decree against you in shamayim. 
When you smacked me a second time, it was 
decreed that you would have to die. When the 
honor of a talmid chacham is in jeopardy, Hashem 
Himself comes out to ensure that it is restored. 
Although I don’t consider myself a talmid 
chacham, in Heaven, they consider me to be one, 
and therefore it was decreed that you will die.” 
Hearing his death sentence spelled out so starkly, 
R’ Efraim began to sob. “Please,” He begged. “I 
did hachnasas orchim and welcomed you into my 
home. I gave you a lulav and esrog. Please, 
forgive me! Spare me!” 
R’ Nosson Nota nodded. R’ Efraim was right. He 
did provide him with a lulav and esrog. He 
squeezed his eyes shut and concentrated intently. 
A few moments later, he said softly, “Alright, you 
will not die. Instead, you will become a pauper. 
Since a pauper is compared to a dead man, you’ll 
fulfill your sentence that way.” 
R’ Efraim continued to weep. “R’ Yid! I gave you 
a lulav and esrog, and I also provided you with a 
sukkah!” He reminded him in desperation. 
“You’re right,” R’ Nosson Nota agreed. He 
concentrated again for a few moments. “In that 
zchus, you won’t be a pauper. You’ll have just 
enough parnassah to live, but you will never be 
wealthy again.” 
“Please, just forgive me completely,” R’ Efraim 
pleaded. 
“I’m so sorry,” R’ Nosson Nota responded 
sincerely. “I truly wish I could forgive you, but 
there are halachos regarding one who shames a 
talmid chacham. It’s not up to me to be mochel on 
the honor of the Torah.” 
Immediately following yom tov, a fire broke out. 
R’ Efraim’s palatial home, along with everything 
inside, went up in smoke. He lost every single 
thing he owned. Just a short while later, he was 
visited by the police, who had caught the thieves 
who had stolen his valuables from his sukkah and 
came to return them to him. With the money from 
the sales of his gold and silver, R’ Efraim was 
able to support himself simply for the rest of his 
life. Everything R’ Nosson Nota had foretold had 
come to fruition.  
As for R’ Nosson Nota? Shortly after yom tov, the 
rav of the city came to visit him, and against his 
wishes, absolved him of his commitment of a year 
of galus. “You’ve suffered enough,” The rav said 
firmly, “And so has your family. It is time to go 
home.” R’ Nosson Nota tried protesting, but the 
rav was adamant. “We’ll go together to Crackow, 
back to your family,” He said, and then reiterated 
his desire to have the young man take over the 
rabbinic leadership in the town.  
“I will obey the rav and go with him to Crackow,” 
R’ Nosson Nota replied humbly. “However, I 
don’t think I am able to take over your position in 
this town.” 
Not protesting, the rav hired a carriage to take 
them to Crackow. The entire city of Crackow was 
up in arms when R’ Nosson Nota Shapiro 
suddenly showed up, accompanied by the 
respected rav of a faraway town. Together, the 
two men made their way to the Eberless home.  
When R’ Moshe Eberless laid his eyes on his 
missing son-in-law, he almost fainted. Collapsing 
into a chair, he called weakly for his daughter, and 
Roiza came running into the room. She, too, 
turned pale at the sight of her husband, and her 
eyes filled with tears.  
“Can you try to forgive me?” R’ Nosson Nota 
pleaded, falling before his father-in-law. “Tikkun 
chatzos is tikkun chatzos, but it was never my 
intention to harm anyone. Please, can you try to 
forgive me?” 
To overcome to speak, R’ Moshe nodded, and 
soon everyone in the room was weeping 
alongside Roiza.  
Since R’ Nosson Nota had refused the rabbinic 
Moshe Shmuel Newhouse 
position in the town where he had spent two 
months of his galus, the rav came up with a 
different suggestion. He discussed his idea with 
the respected individuals in the city, and just a 
short while later, young R’ Nosson Nota was 
appointed rav of the city of Crackow.  For the next 
twenty-six years, until his untimely passing in 
1633 at the young age of forty-seven years old, R’ 
Nosson Nota Shapiro stood at the helm of 
Crackow’s yiddishkeit, guiding its Jews with his 
wisdom and incredible piety. He became well
known as the Megaleh Amukos and wrote a 
commentary on the Rif that is studied by talmidei 
chachamim until today. 
Have a Wonderful Shabbos! 
This story is taken from tape # TB80b 2004 
Toras Reb Kalman 
Lakewood New Jersey 
609.807.1783 
torasrebkalman@gmail.com 
Sponsored by: 
Eli & Malky Friedman 
Chatz & Leahle Schwab 
Yecheskel Schwab 
Chatz Schwab 
DataMap Intelligence  
Yecheskel “Charlie” Schwab 
Moshe Newhouse  


ד"סב 
 
THE LOOK OF A YID 
Part 1 
Yarmulka (Kippah), Tzitzis,  
Order of Getting Dresssed 
____________________________ םש 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    1 
 ד"סב 
 
 
 
 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    2 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
    Yarmulka/Kippah  ..................................................... 1 
     Tzitzis  ...................................................................... 12 
     Order of Getting Dressed ......................................... 60 
     Put on Your Shoes Right ........................................... 63 
  
ד"סב 
THE LOOK OF A JEW 
INTRODUCTION 
When we think of Neil Armstrong’s initial steps on the moon, 
we envision a big puffy space suit descending onto the moon’s surface. 
No one would think that the actual space suit is Neil Armstrong 
for all realize that it is just a garment 
to enable him to exist in outer space. 
In the world around us, much emphasis is placed  
on the beauty and strength of our physical body.  
We have many mitzvohs and halachos related to our body & clothing  
to remind us that 
the real me, and my purpose on this world is my   
and not the ‘spacesuit’ of my body, which is just there  
to enable my   
 ה 
מ
ש 
נ  
מ
ה , 
to exist in the atmosphere of this world. 
ש 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    1 
נ  
 ד"סב 
 
 
 
 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    2 
 ש  אר י  וסי   כ 
aka yarmulka / kippah 
 
The Rabbonon established that men should wear a head covering 
throughout the day. * 
Common practice is to wear what is known as a ‘yarmulka’ or ‘kippah’. 
 
Where does the name “yarmulka” come from? 
 
The   מ  פ  ר   שםי explain that the purpose of a yarmulka is to bring about 
   י  ר  א   ש ת  מ  ים , awe of Hashem (see upcoming LuLLAY’s).  
 
Some say the word “yarmulka” is actually a contraction from either: 
   קֹולֶאֵמ אֵר י - awe/awareness** of G-d 
or  
א  כ ל מ אֵר י - (awe/awareness of the King). 
 
 
 
* In situations where one does not need to wear a yarmulka (ex. swimming)  
a man’s head must still be covered when saying Hashem’s Name. 
 
** Rav Avigdor Miller zt”l would translate   י  ר  א   ש ת  מ  ים as ‘awareness of Hashem’  
from the root word האר. 
 
ד"סב 
ש  אר י  וסי   כ 
aka yarmulka / kippah 
Where does the name “kippah” come from? 
The name ‘kippah’ means 'dome" due to its shape. 
The  
).אי הליגמ( 
ארמג
tells us that 3 people ruled over the whole world.  
The expression the ארמג uses is “הפיכב וכלמ”  
which Rashi explains as "עיקרה תפיכ לכ תחת" – “under the arch of the heavens”.  
As by  תלכת of תיציצ the power of association brings us to think of the דובכה אסכ,  
perhaps the name “kippah” also alludes to the 
עיקרה
,  
reminding us of Hashem, Who rules over the entire arch of the heavens,  
thereby instilling within us םימש תארי, the purpose of the “kippah”.  
תפיכ
(Rav Netanel Bitton) 
It is interesting to note the word    
פי
כ  
ה is from the same   
ש as    כ ף ,  
spoon and palm, as they both have a rounded shape. 
These words are sourced from the letter   כ'
ר 
ו 
ש 
'ף ( כ ) 
whose actual shape resembles a spoon and a dome,  
depending on how you rotate it. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    3 
 ד"סב 
 
 
 
 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    4 
  ש  אר י  וסי   כ 
 
A head covering brings yiras shomayim 
 
The mother of Rabi Nachman bar Yitzchok was told by the astronomers  
that her son will become a robber.   
To avoid this, they told her to ensure his head was always covered. 
She relayed their message and told him to daven, but didn’t tell him why.* 
 
One day, he was sitting under someone’s date tree and his head covering 
fell off. He looked up, saw the dates, and his yetzer strengthened.  
As his head covering was off, his extra yiras shomayim also fell away.  
He jumped up and grabbed the dates with his teeth,  
reverting back to the “robber” within him. 
 
Yarmulka = yorai me’Elokah! 
 
 
 
* (Gemara Shabbos 144b.) 
  אל"    ש  ב  ק   ת  ג הי  ול  י  ר י   שי "הי . – “do not leave him with his head uncovered”.  
Being a good Jewish mother, she told him 
 “   כ  ס  ר י   שי   כ ךי  ה י  כי  ד י   ת  ה  ו  ע י  ל  א ך  מי  ת  ד א   ש  מ  י  ו א  ב  ע  ר י  ח  מי ” –  
“cover your head so you will have Yiras Shomamyim and daven”.  
We see from this that a yarmulka is not a magic potion, rather davening is also needed.  
(Perhaps not explaining to him why he needed to do this led to the next part.) 
ד"סב 
ש  אר י  וסי   כ 
There is “Something” above you. 
The Gemara (Kedushin 31a) says that Rav Huna was very careful  
not to walk 4 amos with his head uncovered 
“  
י
ש
“He said: “The    
ה
ני
אר  
כ 
ש 
מ ה ֹ
ל ֵ
ע 
מ 
ל ה 
ני 
כ 
ש :ר 
מ  
א 
”, 
, Hashem’s presence, is above my head”. 
Our yarmulka is not worn on our palms, our knees, etc., 
rather it is worn specifically on our head, on the top of our bodies, 
to remind us at all times that there is something above us, 
physically – our yarmulka, and realistically – Hakadosh Boruch Hu. 
Yarmulka = yorai me’Elokah! 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    5 
ד"סב 
ש  אר י  וסי   כ 
Keep your lid on  
and don’t let your thoughts ‘bubble away’. 
At the top of our head is our brain,  
the source of our thoughts, emotions, and actions.  
Uncovered, without any   
ה
ע
נ 
כ 
ה 
, subjugation,  
our mind can just bubble and bubble and lead to all types of ideas.  
When we cover our head, it is a reminder for us to “keep our lid on”  
and to keep our thoughts under control for 
 
וד
וב ֹ
כ ץ ֹ
ר  
אֶ
ה ל 
  כ 
אל
מ ֹ
, the whole world is filled with Hashem’s presence. 
A parallel can be made to the way one makes a non-kosher metal sink kosher.  
One of the ways is to use boiling water, which is still bubbling. 
If one uses an electric kettle, it automatically shuts off, so how do you work around this? 
To avoid this problem, if the lid is left open, the water will keep on bubbling.  
Be careful though, that you don’t let all the water bubble away. 
So too, a yarmulka puts our ‘lid’ on to help us remember to not let our thoughts bubble away.  
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    6 
ד"סב 
Yarmulka / Kippah 
1 תוכלה 
1) One may not walk even 4 amos (around 6 feet) with his head uncovered.  
This applies even when playing sports.  
(When swimming, showering, getting a haircut, or similar activities, one 
may be without his head uncovered). 
('ו 'ב ח"וא) 
2) In situations where one does not need to wear a yarmulka (ex: swimming)  
a man’s head must still be covered when saying Hashem’s Name. 
3) Even when going to sleep, we should keep our yarmulka on,  
even though it will probably fall off when we are sleeping. 
Did you know: Some people sleep with a special yarmulka that stays on! 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    7 
ד"סב 
Yarmulka / Kippah 
2 תוכלה 
4) If one’s yarmulka falls off:  
Indoors: the head is considered covered even if one puts his own hand on 
his head. 
Outdoors: his own hand would not count as covered, however a sleeve, 
other material, or someone else’s hand, would. 
To make a brocho, or say Hashem’s Name,  
one’s head would need to be covered as like outdoors. 
5) How big does a yarmulka need to be? 
Rav Moshe Feinstein zt”l said: 
it should be big enough to be considered a ‘covering’. 
Rav Ovadia Yosef zt”l said: 
it needs to be visible from all sides. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    8 
ד"סב 
Yarmulka / Kippah 
Why don’t women wear a yarmulka? 
According to Kabbalah,  
women are more in tune with kedusha and yiras shomayim.  
Therefore, they don’t need a yarmulka to remind them  
of their built-in connection with Hashem.  
Men, who are more physical, need more actions than women  
(yarmulka, tzitzis, tefillin, minyan etc.)  
to strengthen their spiritual side. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    9 
ד"סב 
Yarmulka / Kippah 
Yarmulka in the Gulag 
The famous Russian refusenik, Rabbi Yosef Mendelevich, fought fiercely for the 
freedom to practice Yiddishkeit as he knew. He even tried to hijack a plane and 
take it to Eretz Yisroel. He was caught and thrown into prison by the KGB.  
The prison guards did everything they could to break his spirit. To offset their 
abuse, he would go on extended hunger strikes, showing them that his 
commitment was greater than theirs; he was willing to fight for his freedom, 
more than they were willing to fight to take it away from him. 
While in prison, as he was becoming more connected to Yiddishkeit , he decided to 
wear a yarmulka. But where in a Russian jail is he going to get a yarmulka.  
He decided to take a handkerchief, fold it, and wear it as his yarmulka.  
Although it was a constant battle, he managed to wear his ‘kippah’ all the time. 
One day, his father came to visit him.  
This was a rare occurrence, as his father was not well, and it was difficult for him 
to make the long journey to the prison. The guards decided to test Yosef: 
Before he would be allowed to leave the cell and greet his father,  
he would have to remove his head covering. 
Yosef was faced with a dreadful dilemma. He knew that if he gives in now,  
then they will have broken his spirit — and defeated him.  
And so, he refused to take his kippah off.  
The prison authorities would not budge either. In this epic battle of wills,  
the heartless guards did not give in and refused to allow him to see his father. 
Instead of going through the door and running into his father’s arms, 
Yosef remained strong, did not bend, and kept his kippah firmly on his head! 
(Tragically, he would never see his father again; for his father died a short while later.) 
(Adapted from ‘A Touch of Chizuk’, pg 45, Rabbi Yechiel Spero, Artscroll) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    10 
ד"סב 
Yarmulka / Kippah 
Saved by a yarmulka 
Rabbi Jonathan Sacks and his wife on a trip to the Catskill Mountains in 
New York, were told the following story by their driver: 
One Friday afternoon, he was making his way to join his family in the 
Catskills for Shabbos when he saw a man wearing a yarmulke, bending 
over his car at the side of the road. One of the tires was flat, and he was 
about to change the wheel. 
Our driver told us that he pulled over to the roadside, went over to the 
man, helped him change the wheel, and wished him “Good Shabbos.”  
The man thanked him, took his yarmulke off and put it in his pocket.  
Our driver must have given him a quizzical look, because the man turned 
and explained: “Oh, I’m not Jewish. It’s just that I know that if I’m wearing 
one of these” – he gestured to the yarmulke – “someone Jewish will stop 
and come to help me.” 
(RabbiSacks.org Ki Teitse 5778) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    11 
ד"סב 
תי צי צ 
Understand the meaning of תיציצ and all that which we do. 
A poor man once came across a childhood friend who became very wealthy. His 
friend invited him home so they could catch up on the ‘good old times’. As they 
were sitting, the poor man noticed that whenever his friend wanted something to 
eat, he would ring a bell and butler would come in laden with delicious food and 
drink. The poor man was ecstatic, for he realized that he has now discovered the 
secret to rid himself of the hunger in his home. 
On the way home, he stopped by a store and bought himself an expensive bell – 
the more expensive the bell, the more riches will come his way. When he arrived 
home, he gathered his family together to show them his new prize possession, the 
key to their success. However, no matter how hard he tried, the bell ringing just 
produced …. a bell tone – no butler, no fruits, no delicacies, nothing. 
“I don’t understand, my bell is better than my friends’. How come it doesn’t work?”. 
His wise wife turned to him and explained – “The bell is great, but for it to work, 
you must first do the preparation before it. No preparation = no results.” 
The Dubno Maggid explained: 
yes, תיציצ comes with a guarantee of 'ה תווצמ לכ תא םתרכזו ותוא םתיארו, 
but to remember the תֹוו צ מ through the תי צי צ,  
you must first understand how great the  הוצמ of תי צי צ is  
and what it represents. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    12 
ד"סב 
תי צי צ 
Tzitzis and the wood gatherer 
In חלש תשרפ, the story of the םיצע ששוקמ, the wood gatherer on תבש, 
is followed by the השרפ of תיציצ.  
What is the connection? 
The םינקז תעד explains:  
Upon defending the wood carriers תבש לוליח, 
ונבר השמ said to Hashem that during the week we wear ןיליפת  
which reminds us of the תווצמ,  
but on תבש, when we don’t wear ןיליפת,  
what is meant to remind us of the תווצמ? 
Hashem answered  
“I will give them the special הוצמ of תיציצ which applies throughout every day,  
through which 
יתוצמ 
לכ
 תא םתרכזו– you will remember all of My  תווצמ.” 
Hence, תיציצ is written right next to the story of the םיצע ששוקמ. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    13 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
What does the word  תיציצ mean? 
1) From the word ץי צ ה ל – to look, 
As the קוספ in םירישה ריש states: 
םי  כ רֲח ה ן מ ץי צֵמ ת ונ  לֲח ה ן מ  חי  ג  ש מ  ונ ל ת  כ ר ח א ד מ וע ה ז ה  נ ה. 
for the תי צי צ are for looking at and reminding us of ה
' 
י
"
( שר
) 
and His תווצמ.  
Perhaps the word תי צי צ is plural,  
for when we look at our תי צי צ and think about ה
' ,  
' 
ה
looks back at us and ‘thinks’ of us.  
(יפ ינב) 
2) ץיצ means strings, as in the קוספ in )ח קרפ( לאקזחי says 
“ישאר תציצב ינחקיו" and they took me by the strings of my head 
)ייחב וניבר( 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    14 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
Its special protection 1 
Before a soldier goes out to battle,  
he puts on a bulletproof vest to protect himself. 
Each of the תיציצ is made up of 8 strings and 5 double knots. 
Together this equals 13 which signifies  
Hashem’s  הבהא for us, as well as His םימחרה תודמ ג"י. 
The two front תיציצ (13) combined, equals 26 - ה’s name of םימחר. 
These תיציצ are placed, two in front and two in back,  
which in turn, surround us from all sides with ה"בקה’s protection and love. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    15 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
Its special protection 2 
Throughout our day,  
we evoke the  תוכז of the 3 תובא and 4  תוהמא 
(Hinted to in the 3 and 4 armed ש on the שאר לש ןיליפת) 
When we count the letters in the name of the תובא, 
בקעי קחצי םהרבא, we get 13 
When we count the letters in the name of the  תוהמא, 
האל לחר הקבר הרש, we also get 13. 
Each of the תיציצ is made up of 8 strings and 5 double knots. 
Together this equals 13. 
Throughout our day, wherever we go we carry with us  
the תוכז of our םישודקה תוהמאו תובא, 
reminding us as well to emulate them 
and follow in the path that they set for us. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    16 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
Its special protection 3 
Before we venture into the upcoming day,  
we don our תיציצ, whose השודק protects us in the day ahead, 
from the onslaughts of the ערה רצי and that which is around us. 
Two תיציצ in front, and two תיציצ in back,  
protect us as we say in Maariv "ונירחאמו ונינפלמ ןטש רסהו" 
remove the ןטש from before us - before we do the action,  
and behind us – after we do the action. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    17 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
Its tremendous power & reward - 1 
We find by תיציצ ideas that we find by no other  תווצמ: 
'ה תווצמ לכ תא םתרכזו ותוא םתיארו 
&  "יתוצמ לכ תא םתישעו ורכזת ןעמל" 
the power to remind us of all the other תווצמ! 
םכיקולאל םישודק םתייהו 
The power of תיציצ to make us holy! 
It is one of the least expensive ritual תווצמ, yet its spiritual benefits 
can be priceless (Rav Aryeh Kaplan, Tzitzis, Tallith Katan) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    18 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
Its tremendous power & reward – 2 
There are 248 השע תוצמ, ‘to do תווצמ’. 
These correspond to the 248 limbs in the body, with each הוצמ 
giving strength to a different limb. 
But there are certain תווצמ that we can never do –  
some תווצמ are only for םינהכ, some only for םילארשי,  
and many we can’t do nowadays.  
So how do we strengthen those body parts? 
'ה gave us a blanket הוצמ – תיציצ –  
which covers our body and is equal to all the תווצמ,  
thereby giving השודק to our entire body.  
)זעול םעמ( 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    19 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
םֶהי ֵד ג ב יֵפ נ  כ־ל ע – Why on clothing? 1 (Part 1) 
Before ם ד א and ה ו ח ate from the ת ע ד ה ץ ע,  
they were clothed in an ףי ק מ ה ר וא, a special holy light.  
Upon sinning, they immediately they lost their lofty ה ג ר ד מ  
and needed to search for clothing to cover themselves with. 
When they sinned, they moved away from ד ח א 'ה, the ם ל וע ל  ש  ופ ול א, 
that is often represented by the Letter '
'
א
Moving away from '
'
א
. 
, the letters following are ד ,ג ,ב,  
the same letters which spell – ד ג  ב – to rebel, and ד ג  ב – clothing, 
for the necessity for ‘clothing’  
is an outcome of the initial ‘rebellion’ of eating from the ת ע ד ה ץ ע. 
We are therefore given a special הוצמ (see part 2) on our דגב
to rectify and protect from this  
ה
ד
י
גב
םי
, rebellion. 
,  
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    20 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
םֶהי ֵד ג ב יֵפ נ  כ־ל ע – Why on clothing? 1 (Part 2) 
There were two concepts pulling הוח to eat from the תעדה ץע –  
the eyes and the heart/mind. 
אֶר ֵ ת ו
ל כֲא מ ל ץ ע ה ב וט י  כ ה   ש א ה 
לי  כ  ש ה ל ץ ע ה ד מ חֶנ ו ם י ני ֵע ל א וה־ה ו ֲא ת י כ ו 
“And the woman saw that the tree was good for eating  
and it was tempting to the eyes, and desirous for wisdom.” 
תיציצ are specifically placed on םֶכי ֵד ג  ב, our clothing. 
to rectify the original  
ה
ד
י
גב
, rebellion,  
and serve as a visual reminder – 
ותוא 
to tie up our connection with 'ה,  
enabling us to correct and fulfill 
םֶכיֵני ֵע 
י רֲח א ו
םֶכ ב ב ל
םתיארו
י רֲח א  ור ות ת א ל ו
not following after the desires of the heart and eyes. – the cause for the original  א ט ח.  
(יפ ינב) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    21 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
םֶהי ֵד ג ב יֵפ נ  כ־ל ע – Why on clothing? 2 
Clothing differentiates man from animals.  
Wearing תיציצ specifically on our garments,  
reminds us that we have a higher purpose than animals,  
and to make all our choices and actions holy. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    22 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
םֶהי ֵד ג ב יֵפ נ  כ־ל ע – Why on clothing? 3 
Clothing is one of the most physical things we have. 
(‘Clothes makes the man.’) 
'ה told us to take our clothing and to put תיציצ on it, 
to show and remind us  
that we can and should take our physical items  
and use them for coming closer to 'ה. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    23 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
Why 4 Corners? 
The )בי:בכ םירבד( קוספ says 
הָּֽ  ב־ה  ס כ  ת   ר    שֲא    ך ת ו ָּֽס  כ ת ו  פ נ  כ  ע    ב ר א־ל ע   ך    ל־ה  שֲעָּֽ  ת םי   ל ד  ג 
Even if one is wearing a 5 cornered garment,  
תיציצ is only placed on 4 of the corners. 
The תיציצ on the 4 corners remind us: 
• That Hashem is everywhere – all 4 corners of the world. 
• As תיציצ reminds us of the תווצמ, the 4 corners remind us that no 
matter where we are in the world, Hashem’s הרות and תווצמ apply. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    24 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
The Tzitzis don’t forget 
Among the prisoners at the Auschwitz concentration camp was the Vietzener 
rav, Rabbi Tzvi Hirsch Meisels, When the Nazis forced him and his family from 
their home, there was little time to take anything along. One item he made 
sure to take was a precious tallis which he received from his father-in-law. 
The tallis had belonged to the tzaddik Rabbi Moshe Teitelbaum, author of 
Yitav Leiv. Our Sages teach that tzitzis protect a person from evil and Rav 
Meisels was convinced that a tallis which had been worn by a tzaddik would 
provide additional protection in the dangerous times ahead. 
Upon arriving at Auschwitz, the Jews were forced to surrender all their 
possessions. Thus, Rabbi Meisels had no choice but to hand over his precious 
tallis. He was determined, however, to get it back. He learned that all 
confiscated possessions were at one location in the camp. There they were 
sorted; all items of value were sent to Germany for the government and army 
personnel to enjoy. 
Somehow, Rabbi Meisels joined the group that was assigned to sort these 
possessions. In the course of his work, he found his tallis. Joyously, he 
stuffed it inside his clothes and brought it back to his barracks. He knew that 
in doing so he had taken his life in his hands; if the guards found the tallis 
and realized that he taken it back without permission, he would probably be 
killed on the spot.   
  (cont. next page) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    25 
ד"סב 
(cont.) To minimize the risks, he cut the tallis into a tallis katan which he was 
able to wear underneath his inmates’ garb. This, too, was fraught with 
danger; the gray inmates’ clothing was very thin and upon careful inspection, 
anyone might notice that Rabbi Meisels’s clothing looked somewhat bulkier 
than everyone else's. This, however, was a risk that he was willing to take.  
Incredibly, he wore the tallis katan until the final days of the war. When he 
was working in a labor camp near the city of Branzweig, the sound of 
American gunfire could be heard in the distance. In attempting to flee, the 
Nazis took with them those Jews who still remained alive. Before boarding 
the cattle cars, the inmates were searched in case they had anything of value. 
It was then that the tallis katan was discovered. A German guard named 
Willy ripped the garment off Rabbi Meisels’ body and threw it into a fire as 
the Rav watched in horror. 
Rabbi Meisels was devastated. He believed that the tallis katan had been a 
source of protection for him. Now, with the Germans in a panic as the 
Americans bore down on them, the danger was perhaps greater than ever. 
And his tallis katan was gone. Still, Rabbi Meisels knew that the other Jews 
who had survived to that point had done so without the benefit of a tzaddik's 
tallis katan. Just as Hashem had watched over them, He would continue to 
watch over him.   
  (cont. next page) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    26 
ד"סב 
(cont.) Willy, the wicked guard who had destroyed the tallis katan, was one 
of those in charge of the car carrying Rav Meisels and his son, Zalman Leib. 
Darkness fell and Rav Meisels attempted to sleep in the only way possible: 
as he stood. He turned his head to the left and rested it upon the shoulder 
of his son. Later, Zalman Leib would rest his head upon his father’s shoulder. 
This was how they had slept on all their cattle car journeys since the war had 
begun. 
Rav Meisels had been asleep a few minutes when he was awakened by his 
son’s anguished voice. “Tatte (Father), my shoulder hurts so much! I'm sorry, 
but I can’t take the pain any longer.” Rabbi Meisels had no choice but to raise 
his head, though he found his son's complaint strange, since they had slept 
this way many times before. Rabbi Meisels’ neighbor to his right then told 
the Rav to rest his head upon his shoulder, while Zalman Leib, now also 
overcome by exhaustion, placed his own head upon his neighbor to his left.    
Moments later, the sound of American warplanes was heard. The drone of 
the engines soon mixed with the sound of gunfire as the Air Force crews, 
mistakenly assuming that the train was carrying German soldiers, strafed the 
train. Suddenly, the gunfire ripped a hole in the roof of the car in which Rabbi 
Meisels stood, and shot directly between the tilted heads of the Rav and his 
son — hitting Willy and tearing off both his hands. Soon after, the sounds of 
the planes grew fainter as they headed off. The Jews in the car were all 
unharmed.    (cont. next page) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    27 
ד"סב 
(cont.) Willy screamed in agony and pleaded for the others to do something 
for him. One of the other guards called out sarcastically, “Well, Willy, | guess 
you won't be able to throw the Jew’s prayer shawl into the fire anymore.” 
Upon hearing these words, Willy turned to Rav Meisels and begged 
forgiveness. 
Rav Meisels still had with him a small Book of Tehillim, from which he had 
never stopped praying since the German invasion had begun. Now, he and 
his son sang a chapter in unison, “... Behold! The Guardian of Israel does not 
sleep, nor does He slumber... .” 
One of the Jews in the car, who was not religious, said to Rabbi Meisels, 
“Please continue to pray for us. It is obvious that G-d is watching over you. 
And just as He made that gunfire miss your heads and punish your 
persecutor, so may He soon rescue us all from these evil tyrants” (Sefer 
Mekadshei Hashem). 
Adapted from Shabbos Stories by Rabbi Shimon Finkelman, Parshas Shelach, Artscroll 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    28 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
ם תֹרֹד ל םֶהי ֵד ג ב יֵפ נ  כ־ל ע– for THEIR generations. 
In Biblical times, until the times of the Greeks, 
the common practice was to wear a rectangular, 4 cornered garment, 
in the form of a shawl, toga, etc. 
For them it was obvious that they were בייח to wear תיציצ. 
ל"זח saw in the word 
' 
ם
ת
ר 
ד ֹ
ל ֹ
' 
for their generations, 
that even when the styles change 
and 4 cornered garment is not regularly worn, 
there is a הוצמ throughout all generations  
to specifically wear a 4 cornered garment, ןטק תילט,  
to fulfill this special הוצמ. 
(חל קרפ רבדמב לנברבא) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    29 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
ם תֹרֹד ל םֶהי ֵד ג ב יֵפ נ  כ־ל ע– for THEIR generations. 
The placing of the word ם ת ר ד ל in the קוספ is very interesting. 
It is written after the הוצמ of placing תי צי צ on our garments,  
and before the commandment to place a string of תלכת,  
thereby having the word 
' 
ה
' 
ם ת ר ד ל
'
only referring to the white strings. 
knew that there will be a time when ת ל כ  ת will be hidden away. 
Through placing 
' 
ם ת ר ד ל
'
specifically in this location in the  קוספ, 
'ה was telling us, 
“You may think that even though there is no תלכת the הוצמ of תי צי צ stops. 
That is not so, for 
'
ם ת ר ד ל
'
, continue for all generations 
placing only the white strings ם הי ד ג  ב י פ נ  כ ל ע”. 
) 
יפ ינב
(
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    30 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
תלכת ליתפ – A string of bluish wool 
What is the root of the word ליתפ? 
The י צ נ
ב 
"
comments: 
the source of the word ליתפ is connected to the name י ל  ת פ נ. 
When ה א ל named her son, she said 
“י  ת ל  ת פ נ םי ק ול א י ל ו ת פ נ – I schemed and made plans“ 
(by trading the flowers with ל ח ר). 
We take the ליתפ, string, of ת ל כ  ת,  
which represents our connection with ה
' ,  
and we wrap it around and around the other strings,  
(which represent the human body) 
to instill within us the knowledge,  
that all the plans,  
and all that goes around in life, is only from 'ה. 
(
) 
רבד קמעה
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    31 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
תֶלֵכ  ת – Bluish wool 
The goal of תלכת 
ל"זח tell us, the bluish color of the ת ל כ  ת, 
reminds us of the blue of the ocean. 
When one thinks about the vastness and greatness of the blue ocean, 
he will come to think of the (blue) sky. 
When thinking of the expanse of the sky, 
he will come to think about Hashem and the ד וב  כ ה א ס  כ 
(which in םירצמ had placed ‘under it’ a blue sapphire stone 
to show הרצב יכנא ומע, that always, 
even through and especially through our hard times, Hashem is with us). 
Through our power of association,  
the ת ל כ  ת brings us to ם י מ  ש ת א ר י, an awareness of  'ה,  
and thereby an aid in םכיניע ירחאו םכבבל ירחא ורותת אלו. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    32 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
תֶלֵכ  ת – Bluish wool 
We are royalty! 
Over history (particularly in the 3rd century C.E.) 
the ruling government forbade the usage of ת ל כ  ת for תי צי צ,  
reserving the special color only for royalty and nobility  
(hence the name ‘royal blue’).  
When we look at the ת ל כ  ת and realize that we are royalty,  
as our father is The King,   ונ  כ ל מ  וני ב א,  
(see multiple ת וי נ  ש מ in ת  ב  ש and other locations),  
it brings us to behave and act differently,  
realizing we have a special role in the world.  
) 
יפ ינב
(
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    33 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
תֶלֵכ  ת – Bluish wool 
Reach your  תילכת 
The word תלכת is similar to word תי ל כ  ת, purpose and destiny,  
for through thinking about the color of the ת ל כ  ת,  
we come to our תי ל כ  ת 
of tying ourselves to 
ך ר  ב ת י .  
 '
ה
) 
יפ ינב
(
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    34 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
וֹתא םֶתי א ר ו - And you shall see it 
Due to these words, many wear their תיציצ out, to be constantly visible. 
There was once a king who was involved in a war. The fighting raged on for many 
years. After many endless battles that led to no victory, the king appointed a new 
general with new warfare and strategies.  Shortly after this appointment, the new 
general devised a plan and ended the war victoriously. 
When the general returned home from his brilliant win, the king held a ceremony to 
honor the general in front of the whole city. The entire city lined the streets cheering 
and waving to show him honor.  “You are our hero” they all shouted!!!   
The king called the general up in front of all the people and pinned a shiny badge of 
honor onto his lapel of his coat and pronounced that he would not only be the general, 
but he will also be a nobleman!!!  The general nodded his head and then took the 
medal of honor off of his coat and hung it inside of his jacket. 
Can you imagine the reaction of the king – I gave you a badge of honor  
and you don’t display it publicly – you hide it from view inside your jacket?!! 
The Chofetz Chaim elaborates: 
The world was lacking spirituality – the war was raging. 
After many generations 'ה appointed a new general – לארשי ללכ.  
The townsfolk, the people of the world, are cheering on this ‘general’ realizing that 
they owe him a tremendous debt of gratitude for saving them. 
As a sign of appreciation and of our special position, the King of kings, gave us a badge 
of honor, our תיציצ. Thus, our badge of honor should be displayed proudly and openly 
and not tucked away, out of sight from all. (If it would be dangerous, of course that is different.) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    35 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
וֹתא םֶתי א ר ו - And you shall see it 
We are referring to the תיציצ, of which there are multiple. 
If so, why does the קוספ say ‘You shall see’ “ א 
ות ” ‘it’ in singular form,  
instead of 
"
ם ת וא
"
, them, plural form? 
Perhaps this is to remind us that the Purpose of looking at the תיציצ 
is to see ‘HIM’, Hashem, in all that we do.  
(יפ ינב) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    36 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
וֹתא םֶתי א ר ו - And you shall see it 
The word for ‘it’/’him’ is usually spelled "ותוא" with a 'ו' after the  'א'. 
Here the הרות spells it 
'
ות 
 א 
'
, without the middle 'ו'. 
Perhaps this is to further connect us to Hashem,  
for without the middle 'ו'  
it is as if the קוספ is written, ‘And you shall see 
' 
ו ת א
' 
with Him’, -  
when you look at the תיציצ the objective is to ‘see’ Hashem,  
reminding us of our רשק with Him. 
(Optimally  תלכת is connect us to think of  'ה through association).  
(יפ ינב) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    37 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
'ה תֹו צ מ־ל  כ־תֶא םֶ ת ר כ ז ו 
AND YOU WILL REMEMBER ALL THE תווצמ OF  'ה 
How does תיציצ help us remember all the תווצמ? 
Gematria of תי צי צ = 600, 
 ) 
400
=ת ,
10
=י ,
90
=צ ,
10
=י ,
90
=צ(
+ 8 Strings on each corner 
+ 5 knots on each תיציצ  
= 
613!      
!ג"ירת 
The amount of mitzvohs in the הרות! 
י
"
( שר
) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    38 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
םֶכיֵני ֵע י ֵרֲח א ו םֶכ ב ב ל י ֵרֲח א  ור ות ת אֹל ו 
AND YOU WILL NOT STRAY AFTER YOUR HEART AND EYES. 
How does looking at our תיציצ affect the thoughts of our heart? 
The strings of all the תיציצ combined equals 32 strings – 
8 strings on each corner x 4 corners. 
This is the same   אירטמג of בל, our heart. 
When we look at our תיציצ and internalize it’s message, 
the השודק assists us in combating the  
םכבבל
(See ‘םכידגב יפנכ לע’ above) 
( יפ ינב) 
ירחא ורותת אלו
. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    39 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
Windings of the תיציצ - 1 
י 
"
שר
asks, why is the ה  ש ר  פ of תי צי צ written next to the ה  ש ר  פ of תבש? 
He answers that just like תבש is equal to all the תווצמ, 
so too תי צי צ is equal to all the ת ווצ מ. 
תבש is a reminder of Hashem creating and running the world, 
תיציצ is a constant reminder of the same (see תלכת ליתפ above). 
The א"רג points out the 
תיציצ 
תבש
connection can been seen further by 
analyzing a breakdown of the 39 ת וכא ל מ and the wrappings of the תי צי צ.  
The 39 תוכאלמ broken up into categories: 
תוכאלמ needed to 
produce skins 
תוכאלמ needed to 
produce building 
תוכאלמ needed to 
produce dyes 
תוכאלמ needed to 
produce cloth 
7
8
11
The order of the wrappings of תיציצ:* 
1
st
set
2
nd
set
3
rd
13
set
7
8
11
4
th
set
Fascinating! 
13
*Please note: there are different minhagim for the order of the wrappings 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    40 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
Windings of the תיציצ - 2 
Sefardim wrap the strings of the תיציצ in sets of 10, 5, 6, 5. 
Ashkenazim wrap the strings of the תיציצ in sets of 7, 8, 11, 13. 
What is an idea behind these numbers? 
According to the Sefardi style of winding,  
each winding represents another letter in the Hashem’s Name of  םימחר 
10
ה = 
5
,ו =
6
,ה =
5
,י =
According to the Ashkenazi style:  
When 7 is added to the 8, it equals Hashems name of הק.  
(using here a 'ק' instead of a 'י
' ) 
Next wrapping of 11 is then added, which brings us to 26,  
the אירטמג of Hashems name of םימחר – ק ו ק י.  
The final winding is 13 times, which is the אירטמג of דחא. 
Putting these together we get דחא קוקי, in as such,  
our wrappings are a further testimony and a reminder to us  
that 
דחא . 
 '
ה
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    41 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
Windings of the תיציצ - 3 
What is an idea behind the 7, 8, 11, 13 of the windings? 
7 - Hashem created the world with 3 dimensions. Each dimension starts at a point and 
spreads out into 2 directions – up, down, east, west, north & south, hence the number 
7 signifying a completion of the physical world - 7 colors in a rainbow, 7 seas, 7 
continents, 7 musical notes etc. 
This is why ‘7’ plays a significant role in Yiddishkeit, the physical world being a 
manifestation of the spiritual – תבש, הטימש, days of חספ and תוכוס, רמועה תריפס etc.  
8 - As 7 symbolizes nature, the number 8 symbolizes עבטה ךרדמ הלעמל – the 
power to rise above nature. הלימ תירב is on the 8th day, giving us power to rise 
above our natural instincts. On הכונח, the סנ lasted 8 days specifically, rising above the 
עבט, ‘Mother Nature’ ideology of the Greeks. 
11 - ‘11’ refers to the stars of ףסוי’s dream - a reference to the heightened spiritual 
power of the Yid as in the הכרב of ה
' 
13 – ‘13’ corresponds to the 
to םהרבא of ךערז היהי הכ.  
'
גי
םימחרה תודמ – the way ה' deals with kindness in the 
world, and the 
'
גי
םהב תשרדנ הרותהש תודמ – ways the הרות is extrapolated. 
It is also the אירטמג of the הבהא and דחא signifying ה
' ’s Oneness and His ultimate 
connection with לארשי ינב.     
ל
"
( רהמ
, Rav Aryeh Kaplan Anthology 2 pg 205,  יפ ינב) 
In summation, 7, 8, 11, 13 are a journey from our physical world directly to 'ה. 
We start off bringing השודק to the physical world around us, move on to the world 
above the physical, up into the heavens, and onto the דובכה אסכ.  
So much is built into this special הוצמ of תיציצ! 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    42 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
ם י ר צ מ ץ ֶרֶאֵמ םֶכ תֶא י תאֵצֹוה רֶ שֲא  
The םירצמ connection 1 
The manifestation of Hashem’s presence and redeeming us from  םירצמ 
is constantly stressed throughout the ה ו צ מ of תי צי צ. 
o ם כי ד ג  ב יֵפ נ  כ ל ע – We placed the תיציצ on corners of our garment. 
which reminds us that Hashem showed his tremendous love and care for 
ל א ר  ש י ל ל  כ when he carried them  ‘on the wings of eagles’, as stated  
םי ר  ש נ יֶפ נ  כ ל ע ם כ ת א א  ש א ו          
)י"שר( 
o We place תיציצ on a 4 cornered garment corresponding to the               
4  ת ונ וש ל and levels of ה ל וא ג that Hashem did for us when we were 
taken out of םירצמ - 
י  ת ח ק ל ו         
 ,
י  ת ל א ג ו
 ,
י  ת ל צ ה ו
 ,
י תא צ וה ו
) 
 י
"
שר
(
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    43 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
ם י ר צ מ ץ ֶרֶאֵמ םֶכ תֶא י תאֵצֹוה רֶ שֲא  
The םירצמ connection 2 
ס ול ק נ וא 
The blue color used on תיציצ is the blue called ת ל כ  ת. 
The killing of the first born of םירצמ is called םי ר וכ  ב ל ו כ  ש. 
ם וג ר  ת
translates the word לוכש killing as א ל כ  ת,  
reminding us of the סנ and דסח that 'ה did for us through this הכמ. 
(
) 
י
"
שר
The color of  ת ל כ  ת is similar to the color of the sky as it turns dark,  
which is the night, when ת ור וכ  ב ת  כ מ took place.  
) 
י
"
שר
(
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    44 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
ם י ר צ מ ץ ֶרֶאֵמ םֶכ תֶא י תאֵצֹוה רֶ שֲא  
The םירצמ connection 3 
There are 8 strings on each of the תיציצ. 
There were 8 days from when the ל א ר ש י י נ  ב shechted the ח ס  פ ן  ב ר ק,  
until the singing of ה רי  ש by the ף וס ם י. 
The shechting of the חספ ןברק was the beginning of the spiritual 
redemption of the לארשי ינב, 
as shechting the sheep was a physical act of destroying and eradicating the 
Egyptian god from within themselves. ( שר
י
"
) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    45 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
The תיציצ - לארשי עמש connection 
In the הלפת of עמש one of the three תוישרפ is the השרפ of רמאיו  
which primarily discusses תיציצ.  
If it was just to mention םירצמ,  
there are many other תוישרפ in the הרות that mention םירצמ.  
What is the connection between עמש and תיציצ that they are put together? 
The core statement of the opening statement of  עמש is  דחא 'ה. 
In תיציצ we take one garment – א, 
On it we place 8 strings – ח, 
On each of its 4 corners –  ד 
Reminding us again that ד חֶא 'ה 
(םולש תוביתנ) 
(See also windings of the תיציצ 2 above) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    46 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
THE DOUBLE KNOTS 
Permanently connected! 
A double knot represents permanence.  
This reminds us of our permanent connection with Hashem and His  הרות 
no matter what we have done.  
Perhaps this this is what inspired אידרוד ןב רזעלא יבר to do הבושת when 
the תיציצ slapped him in the face as he was about to do an הריבע, 
reminding him that no matter how far we have fallen,  
we are permanently connected to  'ה. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    47 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
THE FIVE DOUBLE KNOTS 1 
Tied to the הרות 
As תיציצ represents the  תווצמ ג"ירת,  
the double knot represents the two parts of הרות –  
that of בתכבש הרות and of הפ לעבש הרות.  
There are specifically five sets of double knots,  
for all of it is hidden in the 
הרות ישמוח
השמח
. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    48 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
THE FIVE DOUBLE KNOTS 2 
Serve Hashem with your whole being 
תיציצ represents the תווצמ ג"ירת.  
It is a הוצמ that we wrap our bodies with 
as we are to keep His הרות with our whole being - 
הנרמאת יתומצע לכ. 
The five sets of double knots furthers this concept, 
representing our five senses  
which we are to tie to serving 'ה. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    49 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
EIGHT STRINGS 
You can do it! 
The number 8 represents going beyond nature (see windings above). 
The eight תיציצ are reminding us  
not to be complacent and satisfied with the status quo in our  'ה תדובע,  
rather to push ourselves, overcome our challenges,  
and reach for the stars! 
(the next winding level of 11 😊) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    50 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
Tzitzis!!!!!!!! 
After WWII the Klausenberger Rebbe was in one of the DP camps,  
where he received four sets of tzitizis. 
There were 150 DPs clamoring for those four sets.  
How would he decide who to give them to? 
The Rebbe decided that he would raffle them off.  
A Gerrer chassid went and tore his shirt in a way that created four corners, 
making it now obligated in tzitzis. He approached the Klausenberger, 
“Rebbe, everyone else has a mitzvah to wear tzitzis, but are not obligated,  
I have a four-cornered garment - I have an obligation, I should get them.”  
The Rebbe replied,  
“I said I was going to make a gorel, so that is what I need to do.  
However, someone that shows such desire to do a mitzvah  
will certainly receive divine help.” 
Lo and behold, that Gerrer chassid won one of the sets of tzitzis!! 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    51 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
HOLDING תיציצ IN DAVENING: רמאש ךורב - 1 
At the end of רמאש ךורב some hold their תיציצ. Why?  
One of the  םיקוספ discussing the mitzvah of תיציצ states, 
"ךל השעת םילידג" - “You shall make for yourself twisted threads”. 
The אירטמג of the word םי ל ד  ג is 87, 
hinting that when we recite Baruch She’amar, which contains 87 words, 
we should hold our תיציצ. 
What is the specific connection between רמאש ךורב and  תיציצ? 
See upcoming Lu.L.L.A.Y.’s 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    52 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
HOLDING תיציצ IN DAVENING: רמאש ךורב - 2 
At the end of רמאש ךורב some hold their תיציצ. Why?  
Why only two? 
In the first part of Baruch She’amar we say Baruch (“blessed”) 10 times. 
(excluding when it is said as an added praise when mentioning Hashem, such as Baruch Hu) 
These 10 correspond  
to the 10  תורמאמ (utterances) with which Hashem created the world,  
as well as to the 
תורבדה
תרשע
, the bedrock of the הרות. 
As we prepare to sing praises to 'ה with the opening words of הרמזד יקוספ,  
we hold the two front tzitzis which contain five knots each,  
together making ten knots,  
reminding us of Hashems Mastery of the world and His הרות. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    53 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
HOLDING תיציצ IN DAVENING: רמאש ךורב - 3 
At the end of רמאש ךורב some kiss the front two תיציצ. Why?  
Why only two? 
Each set of תיציצ has eight strings and five knots, adding up to 13.  
When we gather the two front fringes together, we have 26,  
which is the אירטמג of Hashem’s Name,  
This reminds us as we enter into הרמזד יקוספ,  
not just to say the words but to focus on Hashem,  
Whom we are saying them to.  
(Rav Schwab on Prayer) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    54 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
HOLDING תיציצ IN DAVENING:  עמש תאירק 
When we say the words ץראה תופנכ עבראמ in the הכרב of  הבר הבהא 
and ask 'ה to gather of from the four corners of the earth,  
some gather all the תיציצ together, also known as תופנכ עברא,  
and hold them in the left hand between the pinkey and ring finger.  
(Some hold this is a hefsek and don’t gather them) 
When we begin saying רמאיו, the השרפ which discusses the הוצמ of תיציצ, 
we take the  תיציצ also into the right hand,  
kissing them when the word 'תיציצ' is said  
and placing them over the eyes when saying ותוא םתיארו.  
(The הרורב הנשמ says placing over the eyes is a הלוגס for sight.) 
They are also kissed when saying תמא and דעל in ביציו תמא.  
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    55 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
Buckle up your tzitzis! 
There was a talmid who was struggling with the mitzvah of tzitzis. 
His parents tried many incentives but he didn’t ‘bite’. 
They asked him to wear them one more day, afterwards they wouldn’t push. 
The boy agreed and headed off to yeshiva. 
That day, on the way (not sure to or from yeshiva) there was a terrible storm. 
Due to the torrential rain and winds,  
the bus driver lost control and went straight into a tree.  
Upon impact the windshield shattered and the driver was injured.  
When Hatzolo arrived on the scene they were made aware  
that there was still a talmid in the back of the bus.  
They went back to rescue this talmid who should have been thrown across 
the bus from the impact, but he was still in his seat…  
stuck to it, because his tzitzis got caught in the seat,  
locking him into place like a seat belt and protecting him from harm  
(Heard from Rabbi Moshe Liebowitz) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    56 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
For just a few kopeks 
At the end of his life, the Vilna Ga’on was lying in a bed and crying.   
One of the people standing near him came close to him and asked  
“Rebbi, why are you crying?” 
The Ga’on picked up his תיציצ and began to cry harder and said  
“In this world for just a few kopeks (cents) you can buy a pair תיציצ,  
wear it all day, and get rewarded for every moment that you are wearing it.   
Where I am going, no money in the world can give me even one more הוצמ, 
even with effort I cannot reach to a greater level!” 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    57 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
Shem and Yefes covered Noach, their father, when he became drunk and unclothed.  
As a reward they both received a type of a covering in the future.  
Shem’s grandchildren were given the mitzvah of tzitzis.   
Yefes’ descendants in the war of of גוגמו גוג will merit to be buried.  
Chom, who degraded his father, was punished with his descendants becoming slaves. 
The Shem Mishmuel enlightens us on the three sons and their differences. 
Chom was unfazed and unabashed by his father being unclothed, as he related to man 
no differently than to an animal. Just as animals do not wear clothing, neither do 
humans need clothing. Therefore, he was punished to be a slave to serve his fellow 
man, just as animals function for the service of man. 
Yefes recognized the beauty and dignity of man and felt it was out of place for man to 
be unclothed. Therefore, his reward was to be accorded the proper respect for men to 
be buried, and not lay as carcasses in the open field. 
Shem recognized something deeper.  
He saw the neshama inside man and his inner spiritual beauty. He recognized that the 
body of a human is like a garment to the soul. Not only was it undignified for Noach to 
be unclothed, and a disgrace to the holy neshama that’s inside, but he also recognized 
that the body, the housing for the neshama, is holy and needs to be covered.  
This prompted him to jump and initiate the covering of his father.  
In line with his action, Shem was rewarded with tzitzis, a spiritual mitzvah  
that transforms and gives a higher purpose to the physical garment they are on. 
Tzitzis reminds us to use our bodies, the clothing for our true essence, our neshama, 
for its’ higher purpose. 
(Rabbi Baruch Bodenheim) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    58 
ד"סב 
תיציצ 
Why optional? 
Rav Chaim Pinchos Scheinberg ל"צז was well known  
for his hiddur in wearing many garments of תיציצ.  
We have learned from all that above that  
תיציצ is an extremely special  הוצמ which has so much in it! 
If so, why did Hashem make it optional –  
one only needs to wear תיציצ if they are wearing a four cornered garment? 
(םימכח instituted the הוצמ of wearing a ןטק תילט being that it is so special) 
As תיציצ represents all the תווצמ, Hashem specifically made it optional, 
teaching us that the true way to come close to Hashem and his הרות,  
is by exercising our הריחב, free choice, and making the right decisions in life. 
Even the תוצמ we are obligated to do,  
we should be doing because we want to, not because we must. 
May we be zoche. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    59 
ד"סב 
השיבל רדס 
Clothes makes the man/woman 
םירצמ 
תולג
was extremely difficult, with לארשי ינב being enslaved  
to the most powerful and influential country in the world. 
Even so, ל"זח tell us, one of the ways that לארשי ללכ stood apart was in 
their manner of dress. This safeguarded לארשי ינב to the point that the 
Torah itself testifies )רבדמב ףוס( that aside from one exception out of millions 
of people, there was no promiscuity and intermarriage with the Egyptians, 
Knowing that we are the children of the םישודקה תוהמא & תובא, 
assisted them and us to maintain the dignity and self-value  
throughout תולג of being a proud member of לארשי ללכ. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    60 
ד"סב 
השיבל רדס 
The whole world is filled with His glory. 
Our body was formed and given to us by Hakadosh Baruch Hu. 
Even when it is dark and/or in private,  
e.g. a bedroom or bathroom,  
there are halochos of תועינצ that apply. 
These תוכלה are not due to our bodies being an object to be ashamed of,  
rather of an acute awareness that ודובכ ץראה לכ אלמ,  
the whole world is filled with His glory. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    61 
ד"סב 
השיבל רדס 
Do it right 
Throughout the הרות, and with regard to many  תוצמ,  
the right side is given more תובישח. 
הלבק יפ לע, the left side represents ןיד,  
while the right side represents םימחר.  
Understandably, we want the םימחר to rule over the ןיד. 
This concept is not just in תווצמ but applies to many areas,  
including getting dressed. 
When getting dressed,  
the right side should be dressed first and then the left. 
When getting undressed,  
the left side should be removed first, then the right. 
(Due to this concept, some are particular that the flap covering the buttons 
should be on the right side with the buttons on the left) 
Giving precedence to the right side for these halochos is the same  
even if one is a ‘lefty’. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    62 
ד"סב 
םילענ - השיבל רדס 
‘Hilchos Shoes’ - the greatness of Yiddishkeit 
An officer in the Russian government,  
in an attempt to belittle the Jewish nation,  
told the Czar how foolish the Jewish rules are.  
“They are so detailed 
they even have rules telling them how to tie their shoes!” 
The Czar in his wisdom replied,  
that having rules even for shoes,  
actually shows the greatness of Yiddishkeit,  
for it is not just random rules that are applied at random times,  
rather it is a lifestyle that is governed  
at all times by the rules of their Torah. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    63 
ד"סב 
םילענ -  השיבל רדס 
Tie them right left 
The א ר מ ג brings a ת ק ול ח מ which shoe should be put on first –  
the right or the left. 
One ר מ א ד ןא מ holds the right shoe is put on first, 
since the right is always more important in Yiddishkeit. 
The other   ר מ א ד ןא מ holds that just like ןי לי פ  ת is put on the left hand, 
we should first put the shoe on the left foot. 
(More on the shoe/ןיליפת connection in next Lu.L.L.A.Y ה"עב) 
We pasken that we fulfill both of these – 
we put on the right shoe first, but don’t tie it, 
then we put on the left shoe, tie it, and then tie the right shoe. 
Lefties, who put ןיליפת on their right hand, have a different order,  
“Righties”: 
Put on right shoe 
Put on left shoe 
Tie the left shoe 
Tie the right shoe 
“Lefties”: 
Put on right shoe 
Tie the right shoe 
Put on left shoe 
Tie the left shoe 
When removing shoes, we should take off the left one first. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    64 
ד"סב 
םילענ - השיבל רדס 
Why do we put on and tie our shoes in such a manner? 
Although we usually give importance to the right side first,  
by shoes we tie the left first, since ןי לי פ  ת is put on the left hand. 
By other  תוצמ we don’t have this deference.  
What is this special connection between shoes and ןי לי פ  ת  
that we say since ןי לי פ  ת is on the left, we tie the left shoe first? 
HaRav Akiva Eiger ל" צ ז ( ע"וש לע א"ער תוהגה) explains in the name of the ך ל מ ה ק מ ע: 
After the war of the 4 kings against the 5 kings,  
the king of םודס offered   וני ב א ם ה ר ב א a part of the spoils of war. 
 
וני ב א ם ה ר ב א refused to take anything, for he did not want anyone to think  
that they are responsible for his wealth, rather it is all only from Hashem. 
In the  ת וכ ז of ם ה ר ב א refusing with saying  
"ל ע נ ך ור ש
the ל א ר ש י י נ  ב were  ה כ וז to two תו ו צ מ. 
ד ע ט וח מ ם א"
,  
Because of “ט וח מ ם א - from a thread”,  
we were given the ה ו צ מ of תי צי צ & ת ל כ  ת, which are threads. 
Because of  "ל ע נ ך ור ש ד ע" – or a shoestrap,  
we were given the ה ו צ מ of ןי לי פ  ת ת וע וצ ר – the straps of the ןי לי פ  ת. 
Since we were  ה כ וז to  ןי לי פ  ת ת וע וצ ר in the ת וכ ז of ם ה ר ב א refusing "ל ע נ ךֹור ש ד ע" 
“not even a shoestrap”, the two became automatically connected. 
Therefore, just like ןי לי פ  ת is placed on the left hand, we commemorate and give 
ת ובי ש ח to the left shoe strap (lace) which is the source for  ןי לי פ  ת ת וע וצ ר. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    65 
ד"סב 
םילענ - השיבל רדס 
Saved by his shoes - 1 
There was a Yid who unfortunately was engaged to marry a non-Jew.  
On the day of his wedding, as he was getting dressed,  
he realized that instinctively he put on his right shoe,  
then his left shoe,  
then tied his left,  
and then tied his right.  
Shocked and realizing that halocho was still rooted within him,  
he quickly rethought his life and what he was about to do. 
On the spot, he ran out of the wedding hall, never to return to the hall, 
instead to a full return to his Jewish heritage.     
(Heard from Rabbi Moshe Liebowitz) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    66 
ד"סב 
םילענ - השיבל רדס 
Saved by his shoes - 2 
A soldier was in the process of becoming religious. 
He wanted to take upon himself a halocho 
that he could keep easily while in the army. 
He decided to keep the halocho of 
putting on and tying his shoes in the proper order. 
One morning, he realized that he put on his shoes wrong 
and decided to start over from scratch. 
As army boots can take some time to lace and unlace 
he was delayed in getting out and to his unit. 
His unit, that left without him, was on a helicopter mission, 
which unfortunately crashed, claiming the lives of those on board. 
His adherence and determination to keep this halocho, saved his life. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.edu@gmail.com    67 


ד"סב 
Booklet 5 
Middos & Menchlechkeit 
__________________________________ םש 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   1 
ד"סב 
This page left blank for double sided printing 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   2 
 ד"סב 
 
 
 
 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   3 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
      Overview & Guide ...............................................................................    4 
Introduction:  ......................................................................................    6 
Week 1: See the Good 
      Living Hakoras Hatov .....................................................................  14 
      Hakoras Hatov Stories ...................................................................  21 
      Program / Activity ..........................................................................  28 
Week 2: Greet and Speak B’sever Ponim Yafos 
      Living Greet & Speak ...................................................................... 29 
      Greet & Speak Stories .................................................................... 32 
      Program / Activity .......................................................................... 41 
      Songs ............................................................................................. 42 
Week 3: Think About Others  
      Living Thinking About Others ......................................................... 44 
      Thinking About Others Stories ....................................................... 46 
      Program / Activity .......................................................................... 52 
Week 4: Clean & Neat 
      Living Clean & Neat ........................................................................ 55 
      Clean & Neat Stories ...................................................................... 61 
      Program / Activity .......................................................................... 64 
      Songs ............................................................................................. 66 
Week 5: Royalty 
      Living Royalty ................................................................................. 67 
      Royalty Stories ............................................................................... 72 
      Program / Activity .......................................................................... 80 
      Songs ............................................................................................. 81 
ד"סב 
OVERVIEW & GUIDE 
Lu.L.L.A.Y. on Middos & Menchlechkeit can be utilized as an independent limud, or as a 6 
week+ program covering five aspects of middos and menchlechkeit. 
The booklet contains insights , source material, stories, programs, and songs. It is advisable to 
review the lesson in advance before giving it over to the talmidim/os. 
Our mascot “Anan” (which is in the process of being copyrighted beH) is present throughout the 
booklet. In the shared folder, there are many middos scenarios for display on bulletin boards, 
based on each week. Please do not create or share ‘Anan’ without express permission. 
Introduction:  
Rebbe/Morah role 
• Discuss the Ideas, concepts, and stories, introducing the importance of good middos. 
Week 1 – See the Good: Focusing on seeing good middos and good in others.  
Rebbe/Morah role 
• Discuss the concept of Hakoras Hatov and how it is essential to being a Yid. 
• Encourage talmidim/os to notice good that others do. 
• Encourage appreciating what Hashem constantly does for us by making brochos properly 
including Birchos Hashachar (printable card in folder). 
Projects: 
• Talmidim/os receive cards (for a raffle) to fill out when they see someone doing something 
nice. Some of these can be put into the yeshiva newsletter and displayed on the bulletin board. 
• English teachers assign a secret buddy to each talmid/ah, whom they will track and observe 
throughout the week and document the nice things the person does. 
Week 2 – Greeting Others 
Rebbe/Morah role: 
• Encourage saying of please, thank you’s, good morning, have a nice day etc. to parents, siblings, 
bus drivers, custodians, school guard etc. 
• Discuss utilizing our power of speech to make a kiddush Hashem wherever we go.  
Projects:  
• Select individuals (lunch attendant etc.) have cards to give out to talmidim/os when they hear 
them say please, thank you etc. Raffle following. 
• Create a list of people we come across and should greet. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   4 
ד"סב 
Week 3 – Thinking About Others 
Rebbe/Morah role:  
• Discuss the concept of  ינירחאל בטימל אלא ארבנ ומצעל אל along with the many gemachs 
and chessed organizations that Klal Yisroel has. 
• Encourage others to do for others even when it is difficult – hold open the door for others (of 
course the talmid/ah should say thank you), sharing snack when someone doesn’t have, etc. 
Projects:  
• Work with your talmidim on putting together a list of as many chessed organizations your 
class (and parents) can think of. Create one for within your class or school. 
• Put together a list of easy ways I can help others (fill up washing up etc.). 
• Food drive for Chessed 24/7 or Tomchei Shabbos 
• Trip to help at Tomchei Shabbos / Nursing home etc. 
Week 4 – Neat & Clean 
Rebbe/Morah role:  
• Discuss why a talmid chochom who has a stain is  'התימ בייח' and why it is important to look 
neat and clean. 
• Encourage keeping the bedroom, home, classroom, hallways, and bathrooms clean – even if 
we didn’t make the mess. Cleaning lady/Janitors job is not to be your slave.  
Projects:  
• CCC – Clean Classroom Contest – classroom, desks, lockers 
• I helped clean up at home program – dishes, playroom etc. 
Week 5 – I Am A Prince 
Rebbe/Morah role:  
• Discuss what it means to be a  שודק יוגו םינהכ תכלממ.  
• We say  ונכלמ וניבא – if my father is a King, that means I am a prince. 
• Encourage prince-like behavior – kindness to others, looking neat, not pushing, not running 
to food, eating sitting down etc. 
Projects:  
• Talmidim put together a list of ways to behave royally. 
• Upper grade skit 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   5 
ד"סב 
Introduction 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   6 
ד"סב 
ץרא ךרד IS  הרותל המדק 
The first Rashi on Chumash asks 
“If the purpose of the הרות is the תווצמ, 
why did 'ה start the הרות with the creation of the world 
instead of beginning the הרות with the first הוצמ of שדוחה שודק?” 
The ב"יצנ in his introduction to רבד קמעה answers: 
הרותל המדק ץרא ךרד is not just a catch phrase but rather a fact. 
Before we can accept תוצמ and the הרות at יניס רה,  
we first must learn what it means to be a mentch. 
Chumash תישארב is an integral part of being a Yid, and can’t be ‘skipped’ 
for within we learn so much about proper middos: 
humility from  'ה saying םדא השענ, 
how to be a  חנ and not a דורמנ, 
an םהרבא and not a טול, ךלמיבא and a הערפ, 
a  קחצי and not a לאעמשי and a לאותב, 
a בקעי and not an ושע and a ןבל,  
about the הדימ of jealousy and how to care for others 
and so much more. 
Once these middos and menchlechkeit are internalized,  
then, and only then, we can move on to accept and keep the הרות properly.
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   7 
ד"סב 
What Makes a Gadol 
A group of bochurim cam to Rav Elyashiv asking him for an eitzah or a segulah 
of how to merit ahavas hatorah and hasmadah. 
They expected him to share a particular approach or style, 
but he surprised them. 
Rav Elyashiv told them: 
The human being who merited soaring to the utmost heights 
of Torah was Moshe Rabbeinu. 
In order to answer your question,  
it is worth contemplating what he did to merit this gift. 
"The Torah does not tell us of Moshe Rabbeinu’s brilliance, nor of his hasmada.  
What the Torah does tell us about him is: 
)ג 
:בי רבדמב(
הָמ ָדֲאָה יֵנ ְ פ לַע רֶׁ ׁשֲא ם ָדָאָה לֹ כ ִמ דֹאְמ ויָנ ָע
הֶׁ ׁשֹמ ׁ שי ִאָהְו
“And the man Moshe was exceedingly humble,  
more than any other person on the face of the earth” 
Rashi explains that this was a humility that expressed itself  
in submission to and respect for every other person. 
“This”, said Rav Elyashiv, “was the unique feature of Moshe Rabbeinu,  
the greatest leader we have ever had, 
and the background to his accomplishments Torah.” 
(A Heart for Another, Rav Yaakov Bender, pg 101) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   8 
ד"סב 
Rav Chaim Solovaitchik’s Matzeivah 
Rav Chaim Solovaitchik was known throughout the world for his prowess in Torah. 
What perhaps is not as well known, 
is his tremendous care and concern for very individual. 
On his matzivah,  
the Brisker Rov, who wrote the matzaivah, 
wanted to make sure that all know that  ץרא ךרד truly is הרותל המדק, 
for when describing Rav Chaim’s greatness,  
he first wrote דסח בר and only then הרותה רש! 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   9 
ד"סב 
Advice For A Lifetime 
When the Ponevezher Mashgiach,  
Rav Chaim Friedlander was sick with his final illness,  
the doctors predicted that he would not live more than a few months. 
He went to Rav Shach, the Ponevezher Rosh Yeshiva and Gadol Hador,  
and asked him what he should work on in the time remaining to him. 
“Middos”, said Rav Shach! 
(A Heart for Another, Rav Yaakov Bender, pg 97) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   10 
ד"סב 
 Middos are the way we act,  
and how we think and feel  
(Marvelous Middos Machine by Abie Rotenberg)  
It’s true, middos are the way we act and how we think and feel. 
But it actually is much more than that. 
The meforshim explain: 
the שדוקה ןושל word הדמ refers to our character traits.  
At the same time it also refers to the measurement of an item.  
These two are the same שרוש, for they are greatly intertwined. 
The measure of who we are, our true status and greatness, 
is not dependent on our material wealth, nor our knowledge level.  
It is based on who we are as a person,  
how we act, and on the measure of our character traits. 
So yes,  
Middos are the way we act,  
and how we think and feel, 
but they are truly so much more! 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   11 
ד"סב 
Our main purpose in the world 
The Vilna Gaon in the beginning of his sefer 
תודמה תריבשב דימ 
ת ק
המלש ןב writes: 
א
זחתהל אוה םדאה תויח רק
The main lifeforce of a person  
is to constantly work on breaking his (bad) middos 
ייח ול המל וא
ל םאו
ם 
And if he doesn’t (work on his middos) 
What is the purpose of his life?! 
)ב ףי  
ע
ס ,א ק
רפ א"רגהל המלש
ןבא(
יע
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   12 
ד"סב 
The Prospective Shidduch 
Rav Shach was once approached by a father 
asking him about two prospective matches that were suggested for his daughter. 
One suggestion was of a bochur  
who was a wonderful learner but his middos were not that great; 
the other had wonderful middos, but his learning was not so great. 
Rav Shach responded that of course he should look into the one with good middos,  
as eventually his middos with the right wife will bring him to greater levels of learning. 
However, the one without the good middos, his learning is severely lacking,  
as middos are the foundation for Torah. 
          
Rav Ephraim Wachsman once said: 
If a bochur has good middos, but doesn’t learn, 
he has one maalah and one chisaron. 
However, if a bochur is a good learner, but doesn’t have good middos, 
he has two chisronos!!! 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   13 
ד"סב 
Week 1: 
See the Good 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   14 
ד"סב 
No! You Can’t Join! 
If a  ירצמ would like to convert to Yiddishekeit,  
even though his ancestors tortured and killed our forefathers, he can. 
If an יקלמע, upon whom there is a הוצמ to wipe out,  
would like to convert to Yiddishekeit, he can. 
If an SS commander would like to convert to Yiddishekeit, he can. 
If a male from  ןומא or באומ would like to convert to Yiddishekeit, he cannot! 
Why can the ירצמ, and the יקלמע, and the Nazi convert,  
while the ינומא and  יבאומ cannot? 
The הרות tells us that when לארשי ללכ were traveling through the רבדמ,  
the people of Amon and Moav did not greet the  לארשי ינב with bread and water. 
Additionally, they were involved in the plot with  םעלב  
to undermine the השודק of  לארשי ללכ.  
This was a direct lack of בוטה תרכה for their forefather טול  
being saved by our forefather וניבא םהרבא.  
The הרות is telling us – you can be mean and cruel, yet still join us, 
however, if in your DNA you are lacking fundamental בוטה תרכה,  
you have no place among the Jewish nation! 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   15 
ד"סב 
Appreciate Hashem’s gifts 
ונבר השמ did not perform the first three תוכמ  
out of  בוטה תרכה for the river that protected him when he was an infant,  
and for the ground that ‘helped’ him when he killed the ירצמ. 
Rav Chaim Shmuelevitz explains 
The river and ground would not have cried if השמ struck them,  
so why couldn’t he perform the first three תוכמ? 
ונבר 
השמ
didn’t perform these  תוכמ for the purpose of his middos development, 
for striking an object that helped him,  
would display a lack of בוטה תרכה to that item. 
Wow! If one shows בוטה תרכה to objects which have no feelings or free will,  
we surely need to show appreciation to people for what they do for us. 
And if we need to show appreciation for people,  
how much more so do we need to show appreciation to Hashem,  
for everything is from Him. 
Properly making brochos on food or תווצמ,  
is one of the ways we show appreciation  
and inculcate within ourselves the הדמ of בוטה תרכה. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   16 
ד"סב 
Birchos Hashachar 
Chazal in their wisdom,  
began our mornings with various תוכרב  
which put us in the mind frame of appreciation.  
With the הכרב of םידי תליטנ לע, we thank Hashem  
for the opportunity to raise up our hands for a higher purpose. 
We then thank Him in the תוכרב of רצי רשא and המשנ יקולא  
for the amazing body he gave us, with all of its innumerable miracles within,  
and for our precious  המשנ that He put inside it. 
We move on to הרותה תוכרב (some say this before המשנ יקולא) 
thanking Hashem for His most precious gift, the Torah,  
and for choosing us to be His special nation. 
The 15 רחשה תוכרב focus on more gifts that Hashem gives us. 
Yes, life has its challenges, but ל"זח are telling us: 
focus on the gifts that you do have, appreciate them,  
and it will completely transform your day. 
* the cards on he upcoming pages are available in the program folder 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   17 
 ד"סב 
 
 
 
 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   18 
 
 ד"סב 
 
 
 
 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   19 
 
ד"סב 
Thank You! I’ll Say It Myself 
Many years ago many people were illiterate and unable to daven.  
In order to enable them to be  אצוי shemoneh esray, 
ל"זח, with the הכלה of הנועכ עמוש instituted  ץ"שה תרזח,  
wherein the  ןזח says each  הכרב aloud,  
with intention to be איצומ those who were unable to daven on their own. 
There is one anomaly to ץ"שה תרזח; 
if the ןזח is being  איצומ the רובצ,  
why is there a separate םידומ, that each individual says (known as ןנברד םידומ)? 
The Avudraham explains: 
I can have someone be  איצומ me with a הכרב praising 'ה,  
I can have someone be  איצומ me with a הכרב asking for health & parnassa,  
but I cannot have someone be איצומ me with gratitude,  
for gratitude has to come from within me  
and I cannot fulfill that obligation through someone else, 
hence the separate הכרב of ןנברד םידומ. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   20 
ד"סב 
A Rainy Day Funeral 
It was a rainy winter day and Rav Shach called his grandson, 
“I want you to hire a cab to take me to a funeral in Chaifa.” 
They got in the cab together as the grandson thought 
“there must be some adam gadol in Chaifa that my grandfather knew.” 
When they arrived, lo and behold, it was the levaya of an old woman. 
There was barely a minyan, and the grandson couldn’t figure out why his grandfather 
would go to this woman’s levaya. 
Following the levaya in the funeral parlor,  
Rav Shach went along to the cemetery even though it was pouring rain.  
He waited until the woman was buried, and then recited Kaddish for her.  
He then stood there in the rain over the grave.  
The grandson was amazed; he couldn’t figure it out.  
When they went back into the car, Rav Shach did not say anything.  
Finally, the grandson asked his grandfather: “Who was this woman?” 
Rav Shach explained:  
When I was in Yeshiva in Europe, it was not like today with a dormitory.  
The boys learned in a shul.  
The “dormitory” was the benches of the shul and there was a seniority system.  
The older bochurim and the ones who were in the “yeshiva” for longer  
were more likely to have a bench to sleep on.  
I was the youngest bochur there,  
so I did not get a bench, rather I slept on the floor.  
In Europe, in the cold Lithuanian winter nights, it was freezing cold. 
I decided “I can’t take this anymore!”  
One day, I received a letter from an uncle offering me to take over his business.  
I had decided that I was going to take this job!  
I just could not take the freezing cold any longer. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   21 
ד"סב 
That night, a woman, whose husband had just died, got up from shiva.  
Her husband had owned a blanket factory  
and she came into the shul offering blankets from the factory. 
“Does anyone here need blankets?”  
I responded “Yes. I need a blanket.”  
With the blankets on the floor and the blankets on top of me,  
my sleeping accommodations became ‘bearable’. 
I decided to stay — and became who I am today!” 
Rav Shach told his grandson:  
“This woman from Chaifa was the woman  
who gave me the blankets in Lithuania so many years ago.  
Without this woman, there would be no Rav Shach,  
no Avi Ezri, no Ponevezh Rosh Yeshiva, no nothing!  
I kept track of this woman, even though this was decades later!  
So, when I heard she was nifteres, I felt I had to go to her funeral. 
The grandson turned to his grandfather,  
“I now understand why you went to the levaya. 
I also understand why you stayed for the kevura and said Kaddish.  
But why did you remain out there standing over the grave in the rain  
after the burial was all over?”  
Rav Shach answered,  
“I wanted to remember what it felt like to be cold.  
I wanted to fully appreciate what she did for me so many years earlier.  
That is why I stayed out there.” 
Hakoras Hatov – an integral part of being a Torah Jew. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   22 
ד"סב 
Don’t Walk On By 
A man sat at a metro station in Washington DC began to play the violin.  
During that time, since it was rush hour, it was calculated that thousands of people 
went through the station, most of them on their way to work.  
Three minutes went by and a man noticed there was musician playing.  
He stopped for a few seconds and then hurried up to meet his schedule.  
A minute later, the violinist received his first dollar tip:  
a woman threw the money in the till and without stopping continued to walk.  
A few minutes later, someone leaned against the wall to listen to him, but the man 
looked at his watch and started to walk again. Clearly he was late for work.  
The one who paid the most attention was a 3 year old boy.  
His mother hurried him along, but the kid stopped to look at the violinist.  
Finally the mother pushed hard  
and the child continued to walk turning his head all the time.  
This action was repeated by several other children.  
All the parents, without exception, forced them to move on.  
In the 45 minutes the musician played, only 6 people stopped & stayed for a bit. 
About 20 gave him money but continued to walk their normal pace.  
He collected altogether $32.  
When he finished playing and silence took over, no one noticed it.  
No one applauded, nor was there any recognition.  
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   23 
ד"סב 
No one knew this, but the violinist was Joshua Bell,  
one of the best musicians in the world.  
He played one of the most intricate pieces ever written,  
with a violin worth 3.5 million dollars.  
Two days before his playing in the subway,  
Joshua Bell sold out at a theater in Boston with seats averaging $100 each.  
This is a real story.  
Joshua Bell playing incognito in the metro station  
was organized by the Washington Post  
as part of a social experiment  
to see whether in a commonplace environment at an inappropriate hour:  
Do we perceive beauty? Do we stop to appreciate it?  
            
Hashem provides us with everything, so much goodness, so many gifts,  
without which our life would be greatly hampered. 
How much would a blind person pay to be able to see, a deaf person to hear? 
A paralyzed individual to be able to walk and bend down? 
And so so much more. 
Do we stop to appreciate all the millions of gifts He gives us,  
or do we just ‘walk on by’? 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   24 
ד"סב 
A Cat Tale 
One day in Yeshiva Knesses Chizkiyahu of Kfar Chassidim,  
the widow of the late Dean, Rabbi Noach Shimanowitz,  
went down to the storage room together with one of the students  
to bring up some supplies for the kitchen.  
While they were in the storage room, they heard suspicious noises.  
When Rebbetzin Shimanowitz asked what the source of the noises were,  
she was told that there were mice in the area.  
Rebberzin Shimanowitz was aghast at this news 
and asked the talmidim to find a solution to the problem.  
A cat was duly obtained, with the hope that it would eliminate the problem 
A few weeks later, Rabbi Eliyahu Lopian, the Mashgiach of the yeshiva,  
was walking in the yeshivah with a talmid, when they ran into the cat.  
Rabbi Lopian was taken aback - he had been unaware of the cat's presence,  
and this was the first time he had seen it on the yeshivah grounds. 
"Whose cat is this?" inquired Rabbi Lopian. The talmid explained that the cat had 
been brought to the yeshivah to curtail the mice problem. 
Rav Lopian inquired further, "And who feeds her?" 
The talmid answered, "She has plenty of food - she eats the mice.  
We don't need to bring her food."  
Rav Lopian answered, "I don't understand.  
If she does her job and scares off the mice, she won't have anything left to eat!  
We brought her here to perform a service, so we have to feed her!" 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   25 
ד"סב 
Rav Lopian then entered his apartment and brought out a bowl of milk.  
At that moment, as he knelt to place the bowl before the cat, 
someone snapped a photo of the event -  
and that photo is today, one of the most famous photos in the Yeshiva world.  
A photo of a great tzaddik expressing his gratitude and concern for a cat! 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   26 
ד"סב 
A Food Package From Afar 
R' Yaakov Orenstein of London, would frequently tell his students  
the following story, which happened with his rebbi, the Tchebiner Rav. 
"During the war, the Red Cross circulated a long list  
of names of Jewish people who were in Russia.  
I noticed the name "Weidenfeld' on this list.  
I was not sure that this was my rebbi, but on the chance that it was,  
I hurried to send a package of food to him through the Red Cross.  
I thought to myself, if it is the Tchebiner Rav, good.  
If not, another Jew will enjoy the food. 
"The war ended several years later,  
and the Tchebiner Rav managed to reach Eretz Yisrael.  
One day, a telegram arrived at my home in London, containing the words:  
'I arrived in Chaifa today. Thank you for the food you sent. Weidenfeld." 
So deep was the Tchebiner Rav's gratitude  
that the first thing he did after arriving in Eretz Yisrael, after years of suffering,  
was to send a note of thanks  
to a person who had sent him a package of food several years earlier. 
Each time R' Yaakov Orenstein told this story,  
tears would stream from his eyes, as he recalled the sterling middos of his rebbi. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   27 
ד"סב 
SCHOOL PROGRAM 
(File available in folder) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   28 
ד"סב 
Week 2 
Using our words 
תופי םינפ רבסב 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   29 
ד"סב 
The Essence of a Yid 
The name Yehuda means “Thanks”,  
as האל, his mother, gave thanks to 'ה for her having a 4th one of the םיטבש. 
We are known as “Yehudim”, after Yehuda, the leader of the םיטבש,  
for being appreciative is the core of our essence. 
We therefore start off our day with the words  ינא הדומ - “Thank you!”,  
building within ourselves the essential and satisfying הדמ of בוטה תרכה, 
appreciating the good that comes our way. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   30 
ד"סב 
The Six Sentence Thank You 
After the fruit of the new season is harvested,  
the owner brings up the first of those fruits to the Bais Hamikdash  
to fulfill the mitzvah of םירוכב.  
The הרות tells us that when the owner brings it,  
there is a lengthy “thank you” - 6 םיקוספ worth!! – that he must say,  
outlining the different elements Hashem has done for us throughout our history,  
until the day of bringing these םירוכב. 
It is important to say “thank you”,  
but these  םיקוספ are telling us a fundamental lesson in how to say thank you. 
Our thank you shouldn’t just be a roll off the tongue “Thank you”  
rather we should aim to specify what we are saying thank you for. 
“Thank you for making supper” 
“Thank you for your gift” 
“Thank you for fixing the light” 
Etc. 
When we do so, it makes the thank you more meaningful for ourselves,  
And more meaningful for the one whom we are thanking. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   31 
ד"סב 
Good morning, Herr Mueller 
Near the city of Danzig, Poland, lived a prominent Rav.  
Every morning the Rov would take a walk, accompanied by his son-in-law. 
During his morning walk, the Rav would greet every man, woman, and child  
whom he met on his way, with a warm smile and a cordial "Good morning."  
Over the years, the Rav became acquainted with many of the townspeople this way 
and would always greet them by their proper title and name. 
Near the outskirts of town, he would exchange greetings with Herr Mueller,  
a Pole, originally from Germany.  
"Good morning, Herr Mueller!"  
the Rav would hasten to greet the man who worked in the fields.  
"Good morning, Herr Rabbiner!"  
would come the response with a good-natured smile. 
Then the war began. The Rav’s strolls stopped abruptly.  
Herr Mueller donned an S.S. uniform and disappeared from the fields. 
The fate of the Rav was like that of much of the rest of Polish Jewry.  
He lost his family in the death camp of Treblinka,  
and after great suffering, was deported to Auschwitz. 
One day, during a selection at Auschwitz,  
the Rav stood on line with hundreds of other Jews awaiting the moment  
when their fates would be decided, for life or death.  
Dressed in a striped camp uniform,  
head and beard shaven and eyes feverish from starvation and disease,  
the Rav looked like a walking skeleton. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   32 
ד"סב 
"Right! Left, left, left!"  
The voice in the distance drew nearer.  
Suddenly the Rav had a great urge to see the face of the man  
with the white gloves, small baton, and steely voice, 
who played God and decided who should live and who should die.  
His lifted his eyes and heard his own voice speaking: 
"Good morning, Herr Mueller!" 
"Good morning, Herr Rabbiner!"  
responded a human voice beneath the S.S. cap adorned with skull and bones.  
"What are you doing here?"  
A faint smile appeared on the Rav’s lips.  
The baton moved to the right – to life.  
The following day, the Rav was transferred to a safer camp. 
The Rav, now in his eighties, told me in his gentle voice,  
"This is the power of a good-morning greeting.  
A man must always greet his fellow man." 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   33 
ד"סב 
The Greeting That Saved A life 
Pedro, the security guard at a major food plant,  
welcomed the sound of jangling keys, as it signaled the end of the workday. 
“Everybody out?” the manager asked. 
“Nope, the rabbi is still inside somewhere.” 
By “the rabbi,” Pedro meant a religious Jew named David, hence his nickname. 
The manager went off to search for David, but shortly later he returned alone. 
“Sir, I am positive he’s in there,” Pedro replied with conviction“ 
“Are you absolutely sure he didn’t leave yet, I didn’t find him?  
Maybe you didn’t notice him slip by as he left for the day?” 
“Sir, I am positive he’s in there somewhere,” Pedro replied with conviction.  
Not too pleased, the manager went off looking for David for the second time.  
After a few minutes he was back, but no David.  
With as much calm as he could muster, he said,  
“Pedro, you must be mistaken. I have searched the entire facility twice.  
There’s no way I’m going back to search again.” 
Meanwhile, inside the factory, in a walk-in freezer locked from the outside,  
David lay semiconscious, literally freezing to death.  
His muted calls for help began to slur until they faded completely.  
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   34 
ד"סב 
As if in a distant dream, he heard what seemed to be the sound of a shouting. 
“I’m locking up now,” the manager yelled, leaving no room for arguments.  
And yet Pedro persisted,  
“Sir, allow me to check myself, maybe the rabbi is in some type of trouble . . .” 
With that, the manager and Pedro jumped and dashed towards the freezers,  
finding David semi-frozen inside.  
They took him out and revived him, saving his life. 
The next day, the manager asked Pedro:  
“I’m really curious. How did you know that David was still inside the plant?” 
“It’s really very simple,” Pedro answered.  
“Every single morning without fail, I am greeted with a solitary ‘good morning.’  
It’s the rabbi who greets me this way.  
Every evening, upon leaving, he wishes me a hearty ‘good night.’  
Yesterday morning I received my usual cheery ‘good morning,’  
but I still hadn’t received my usual ‘good night’,  
so I knew he must still be inside!” 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   35 
ד"סב 
How Do You Say Thank You in English? 
Heart surgery is an extremely risky procedure for anyone.  
When Rav Yosef Shalom Elyashiv, zt”l,  
at the age of 102, required a heart procedure,  
no doctor in Eretz Yisrael was willing to take on the risk of performing it.  
Instead, Dr. Clair, a world-renowned heart surgeon from America,  
along with his team of doctors and equipment, was flown in,  
despite the considerable expense.  
Boruch Hashem, the surgery was successful. 
Before the doctor and his team returned to the United States,  
he made a final visit to Rav Elyashiv.  
Anticipating this visit, Rav Elyashiv turned to someone and asked,  
“How do you say thank you in English?”  
He practiced saying the words “thank you” multiple times, 
until he could say them fluently.  
When the doctor finished his visit,  
Rav Elyashiv expressed his gratitude in English by saying, “Thank you.”  
People around them were surprised, 
because Rav Elyashiv had been communicating with the doctor  
through an interpreter throughout their interactions. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   36 
ד"סב 
They wondered why it was so important for him to personally say “thank you”  
instead of relying on the interpreter to translate “todah rabba.”  
When Rav Elyashiv was asked this question,  
he explained a fundamental concept, based on the Avdraham (quoted above). 
During Chazaras Hashatz, we can appoint a messenger, the shaliach tzibbur,  
to beseech Hashem on our behalf for health or parnasa.  
The shaliach tzibbur can intercede for us in many requests.  
However, when it comes to thanking Hashem,  
it must be done personally by each individual.  
That is why Chazal instituded Modim D’Rabbonon,  
for we cannot delegate someone else to say thank you on our behalf 
because the depth of gratitude varies based on the individual. 
So too here, I needed to express my appreciation to the doctor, myself, 
and couldn’t rely on an interpreter to do it for me.  
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   37 
ד"סב 
Make Them Feel Tall 
(Yoel Gold video in file) 
Rav Eliezer Geldzahler, the Rosh Yeshiva of Yeshiva Ohr Yisroel,  
was niftar young in a bus crash. 
A few years later, his daughter was driving on the Garden State Parkway.  
She stopped for gas and noticed that the attendant was a midget.  
As he began to wash her windows,  
he caught sight of a large picture of Rav Geldzahler on the passenger seat.  
He became visibly excited as he pointed to it. 
“How do you know that man?” he asked in a state of agitation.  
“I’ve been looking for him for more than two years. Where is he?” 
His daughter gently informed him that the man in the portrait was her father  
and that he had passed away from injuries sustained during a bus accident.  
The fellow stared at her, disbelieving, and then began to cry silently. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   38 
ד"סב 
“You know,” he said,  
“I do this job day after day, morning after freezing morning.  
There aren’t many jobs available to someone like me.  
Cars pull in here every few moments,  
but everyone averts their eyes,  
feeling uncomfortable by my strange appearance. 
“Then, one day, your father pulled in.  
He looked me straight in the eye, like no one else had ever done.  
‘My friend,’ he said to me, ‘you are an inspiration. 
You were born with what might appear to be a great handicap,  
but you refuse to play the role of the victim.  
You get up in the morning, go to work, and earn an honest living.  
You are a role model! 
You teach that circumstances should not dictate  
the terms of a person’s existence. 
“‘I am on my way to New York, where I have a large school.  
Today, I am going to tell my students all about you,  
so that they might learn from your example.'” 
With his eyes glistening, the gas station attendant completed his tale.  
“Of course I so looked forward to seeing your father.  
He made me feel tall.” 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   39 
ד"סב 
People We Can Greet Throughout Our Day 
(make a list with your class) 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
Spouse / roommate 
Parents 
Children 
Siblings 
Neighbor 
Bus Driver 
Security guard 
School secretary 
Principal 
10. Rabbeim/Teachers 
11. School Custodian 
12. Classmates 
13. Person serving lunch 
14. Mailman & Delivery personnel – Packages, food, flowers  
15. Cashier 
16. Gas Attendant 
17. Taxi Driver 
18. Co-worker 
19. Waiter 
20. Etc. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   40 
ד"סב 
SCHOOL PROGRAM 
(File available in folder) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   41 
ד"סב 
Hakoras Hatov 
Country Yossi (Album Lkovod Shabbos Kodesh) (Song available in folder) 
בוטה 
תרכה
means you have to say, 
thank you for the things that people do for you each day. 
Not just for the extraordinary things they do,  
but even for the little things too. 
The man who drives your school bus every morning is so great,  
He wakes up very early to make sure you don't come late. 
And later on, he drives you home when your long day is through, 
So don't forget to thank him, it's the least that you can do. 
תרכה בוטה means you have to say, 
thank you for the things that people do for you each day.  
Not just for the extraordinary things they do,  
but even for the little things too. 
Now let's say that you're shopping, Kivi, and your hands are full, 
You'd like to push the exit door, but the sign says pull. 
You can't get out, you start to shout, can someone get the door? 
Then Moishe Shmiel says let me help 'cause that's what friends are for. 
תרכה  בוטה means you have to say, 
thank you for the things that people do for you each day.  
Not just for the extraordinary things they do,  
but even for the little things too. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   42 
ד"סב 
Now Tuki, just imagine that your toys are on the floor, 
I ask you please to pick them up, but you just say what for?  
They'll just be on the floor again the next time that I play, 
Then Kaylie comes and picks them up, so now what do you say? 
תרכה  בוטה means you have to say, 
thank you for the things that people do for you each day. 
Not just for the extraordinary things they do,  
but even for the little things too. 
תרכה  בוטה means you have to say, 
thank you for the things that people do for you each day. 
Not just for the extraordinary things they do,  
but even for the little things too. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   43 
ד"סב 
WEEK 3 
THINKING  
ABOUT OTHERS 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   44 
 ד"סב 
 
 
 
 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   45 
 
Created for Others 
 
In the introduction to the sefer םייחה שפנ from Rav Chaim Valozhin,  
Rav Chaim’s son writes, that his illustrious father, would consantly tell him: 
 
 ְו ָ כ ָה ה ָי ְד ה ָב ֹור  ֵא ַל ָ ת י ִמ  די 
 ֶׁ ׁש ֶׁז ָ כ ה ָה ל ָא ָדם –   
 ֹל ְל א ַע ְצ ֹומ  ִנ ְב ָרא  ַר ְל ק ֹוה ִע ְל לי ַא ַח ִר ִני י 
 ְ כ ָכ ַא ל ֶׁ ׁש ִי ר ְמ ָצ ְ ב א ֹכ ֹוח  ַל ַע  ש ֹות 
 
And these were his words to me regularly 
This is the purpose of man –  
He is not created for himself 
rather to assist others 
 all that is within his power. 
 
 
  
ד"סב 
Special Seder Songs
An older couple moved to Lakewood to be next to their children.  
Sadly, the husband was niftar, and the next few years were very difficult for the wife. 
Then came Corona and she would have to quarantine for Pesach.  
Not to have her husband, and now, not to be with any of her children!  
She had never spent a Yom Tov alone. She was inconsolable. 
One of the neighbors found out about her distress.  
They called her up and told her since their units are so close to each other 
the family would happily move their dining room table next to her open window.  
We can have the seder and you will be with us!” 
And so it happened. 
After the first days were over,  
the woman called her children, bubbling over with joy. 
She couldn't stop talking about what wonderful sedorim she had enjoyed.  
The best part was all the songs they sang.  
This family had the same minhagim and exact niggunim of her late husband.  
It brought her great comfort and happiness. 
Little did she know, that this couple called each and every one of her children  
to hear the songs of their late father.  
The children sent recorded messages,  
which the family memorized for the seder night, 
changing their usual songs, just to bring joy to this almanah. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   46 
ד"סב 
The Birth of Hatzalah 
In 1965, 
Rabbi Herschel Weber was walking down a street in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 
when a man collapsed right in from of him. 
911 was called, but by the time the ambulance got there the person had died.  
The EMT stated that if they had arrived a few minutes earlier, 
the victim would have had a chance. 
He asked the EMT what they would have done and they said they would have 
given the man oxygen among other procedures. 
Motivated by what he just experienced,  
Reb Herchel went immediately to buy an oxygen tank,  
and trained himself and others in emergency life saving methods. 
And so Hatzalah was born, 
the largest volunteer ambulance organization in the world,  
which has since saved countless lives, 
due to the care and concern of just one individual! 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   47 
ד"סב 
Saved by a Yarmulka 
Rabbi Jonathan Sacks and his wife on a trip to the Catskill Mountains in New York,  
were told the following story by their driver: 
One Friday afternoon,  
The driver was on his way to join his family in the Catskills for Shabbos 
when he saw a man wearing a yarmulke, by a car at the side of the road. 
One of the tires was flat, and he was about to change the wheel. 
The driver pulled over to the roadside, went over to the man, 
helped him change the wheel, and wished him “Good Shabbos.” 
The man thanked him, took his yarmulke off and put it in his pocket. 
The driver must have given him a quizzical look, 
because the man turned and explained: 
“Oh, I’m not Jewish. It’s just that I know that if I’m wearing one of these” – he gestured to the yarmulke – 
“someone Jewish will stop and come to help me.” 
(RabbiSacks.org Ki Teitse 5778) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   48 
ד"סב 
The Phone Call 
At a dinner, the guest speaker introduced himself with an interesting request.  
He had just gotten up from shiva for his father,  
and was not in the mood to be a guest speaker at a dinner. 
He tried canceling, but the organizers had insisted that they needed him to speak,  
so he had come. 
Before he spoke, he made a request.  
His mother was, lo aleinu, a fresh almanah,  
and he asked if, assuming they enjoyed his derashah,  
they could take a moment to phone her and tell her so.  
Perhaps the people smiled at the request,  
and no doubt, some of them took it seriously and intended to honor it,  
but by the next morning, it was largely forgotten. 
Out of the several hundred audience members  
one person heard the sincerity in the request and honored it. 
The mother received a call from none other than Rav Shmuel Kamenetsky! 
(A Heart for Another, Rav Yaakov Bender, pg 99) 
         
To be a gadol in Klal Yisroel you may have to have a great mind,  
but you need to have an even greater heart! 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   49 
ד"סב 
How many chesed organizations can you think of? 
Here are just a few. 
Hatzalah 
Tomchei Shabbos 
Chaveirim 
Chesed 24/7 
Bikkur Cholim 
Shomrim 
Chai Lifeline 
Bonei Olam 
A T.I.M.E. 
Friendship Circle 
Healing Hearts 
Relief 
Kesher Nafshi 
Amudim 
Yedidim 
My Extended Family 
Chasdei Lev 
Renewal 
Ezer Mizion 
Chavivim 
Lev L’Achim 
Links 
Mesamche Lev 
Mikimi 
Misaskim 
Ohel 
RCCS 
Shalom Task Force 
Torah Anytime 
Yachad 
Yad Eliezer 
Yad Ezrah 
Yad Sarah 
Bina 
Sister to Sister 
Dor Yesharim 
Zichron Shlomo 
Tantzers 
Ten Yad 
Yedidim 
And so many more! 
!לארשי ךמעכ ימ 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   50 
ד"סב 
Tomchei Shabbos of Rockland 
(distribution center for families in need) 
And this is just for one year, for one community!! 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   51 
ד"סב 
What Type of Gemach Will You Open? 
One of the middos that לארשי ללכ proudly possess is that we are םידסח ילמוג. 
We always are looking out for one another  
and working out ways that we can help each other.  
A way to help many people is to open a Gemach (which is shortened from דסח למוג) 
Here is a small list of a few gemach ideas in one small community. 
Artificial floral centerpieces gemach  
Baby banz earmuff protectors gemach  
Baby equipment gemach  
Bris outfit gemach  
Bris pillow gemach  
Children’s dvd gemach  
Chumashim gemach  
Computer gemach  
Diabetic supplies gemach 
Diapers gemach 
Gown gemach  
Costume gemach  
Free loan gemach  
Kittel gemach  
Medical equipment gemach  
Shietles & tichels/snoods/hats gemach  
Simcha "shtick" gemach  
Start up kosher kitchen gemach  
Tablecloths gemach  
Tables and chairs gemach  
Tefillos booklets for weddings  
Torah tape library gemach  
Uniform gemach  
Utiliy pump gemach  
Did you know that the Hakhel Gemach list which is for Brooklyn+  
is over 100 pages long!! 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   52 
ד"סב 
What are ways  
that you can actively think & help others? 
Physically:
______________________________      
______________________________    
______________________________ 
  ______________________________ 
Monetarily
______________________________    
______________________________      
  ______________________________ 
______________________________ 
Emotionally
______________________________    
______________________________    
  ______________________________ 
  ______________________________ 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   53 
 ד"סב 
 
 
 
 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   54 
 
What possible gemach ideas can you start 
in your school and/or classroom? 
 
For our school For our classroom 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
ד"סב 
WEEK 4 
Clean & Neat 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   55 
ד"סב 
You Are Created In the Image Of Hashem 
"
דֶסָח ׁ שי ִא ֹּ ו ׁשְפַנ לֵמֹּ ג
"
 .
ֹּ
,ן ֵקָ ז ַה לֵ לִה הֶז ,
,םָ מִע ְ ךֵלֹּוהְו ְ ךֵ לַהְמ הָי ָה וי ָדי ִמְלַ תִמ רַטְפִנ הָי ָהֶ ׁש הָעָ ׁשְ בֶ ׁש
ֵ
לֹּוה הָ תַא ן ָכי ֵהְל  ונֵ ב ַר וי ָדי ִמְלַ ת ֹּ ול  ור ְמָא
 ?
.
הָו ְצִמ תֹּו ׂשֲעַל םֶהָל רַמָא
ץָח ְרֶ מַה תי ֵבְ ב ץֹּח ְרִל ן ֶהָל רַמָא
אי ִה הָו ְצִמ ֹּ וז י ִכְו ֹּ ול  ור ְמָא
?
 ,ם ָדָאָה תֶא הָ ׂשָע םי
?
וז הָו ְצִ מ הַמ י ִכְו ֹּ ול  ור ְמָא
 .ן ֵה ,םֶהָל רַמָא
,תֹּואי ִסָק ְר ִק י ֵ תָבְב ו תֹּואי ִט ְרַט י ֵ תָבְ ב ן ָתֹּוא םי ִדי ִמֲעַ מֶ ׁש םי ִכָל ְמ לֶ ׁש ןיִנ ֹּוקי ִא ם ִא הָמ
,תֹּונ ֹּוז ְמ ֹּ ול ןי ִלֲעַמ ן ֵהְו ן ָפְטֹּו ׁשְו ן ָק ְרֹּומ א וה םֶהיֵלֲע הֶ נ ַמְתִ נ ֶ ׁש י ִמ
,ת וכְלַמ יֵלֹּודְ ג םִע ל ֵ דַ ג ְתִמ א והֶ ׁש אָ לֶא דֹּוע אֹּלְו
בי ִתְכ ִ ד ,ת ומ ְדִב ו םֶלֶצְ ב י ִתא ֵרְבִ נ ֶ ׁש יִנֲא
ק
לֱא םֶלֶצְ ב י ִ כ ִ
!
) ֹּ
ו ,ט תישארב
 (
הָ מַכְו הָ מַ כ תַחַא לַע
The Medrash (Vayikra Rabba 34:3) states: 
When Hillel Hazakein would leave his students, they would accompany him and ask: 
“Rebbi, where are you going?” “To do a mitzvah,” he would reply. 
“Which mitzvah is that?” “To wash in the bathhouse.”  
They would ask. “Is it a mitzvah to wash?” “Yes,” he replied.  
“The kings that stand in public theaters and circuses  
have a special officer whose job is to rinse and scrub them to keep them clean.  
They pay him for this, and he sits with the elite of the kingdom.  
How much more so must I wash and myself, 
for I am made in the form and likeness of the Hashem,  
as it is says in the possuk “For He made man in the likeness of G-d” 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   56 
ד"סב 
Wash ‘em 
“ 
ונ ֹּוק
לי ִב ְ ׁשִ ב ֹּ
םֹּוי
ל
כְ ב ויָלְג ַרְו וי ָדָי ויָנָ פ ם ָדָא ץֵחֹּור ׇ
” 
The gemara (Shabbos 50b) tells us  
‘a person should wash his face, hands, and feet every day,  
in honor of his Maker, Hashem.’ 
Rashi on this gemara comments 
that aside from us being created in Hashem’s image  
and therefore intrinsically there is a requirement to be neat and clean, 
when people see us looking clean and respectable,  
it brings a kiddush Hashem as they will say  
ומלועל ול הככש ךורב -  
“Blessed is the One, Who has such a person in His world”. 
(If this halocho applies in a time when it wasn’t always so easy to get water,  
how much more so today,  
when Hashem bestowed on us the gift of modern plumbing and running water.)  
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   57 
ד"סב 
Keep Them Clean 
 'ר רמא
ןנחוי 
ודגב לע בבר אצמנש םכח דימלת לכ 
התימ בייח 
Rabbi Yochanan said דיק תבש(
).
:  
A Talmid Chochom that has a fat stain on his clothes (whose clothes are dirty) 
is liable to death ( םימש ידיב) 
as he lowers himself in the eyes of others,  
thus causing Hashem and Torah to be lowered.  
Rav Eliezer Pappo, writes in his sefer ץעוי אלפ:  
“Every person should regard himself  
as if he is a talmid chacham for this purpose.” 
(see end of 'ןויקנ') 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   58 
ד"סב 
Why Yehoshua? 
Moshe was told to appoint Yehoshua as his successor. 
The םינקז bemoaned the fact that the face of Moshe  
resembled the sun (in its radiance), while of Yeshoshua (only) resembled the moon.  
“Woe to us for the embarrassment; woe to us for the shame and disgrace." ).הע ב"ב( 
Why did the םינקז refer to it as a 'disgrace'?  
Yehoshua merited leadership not because he could match any of Moshe's attributes,  
rather, because he was Moshe's talmid muvhak and he served him diligently. 
Additionally, Yehoshua spread out and organized the mats and the benches  
in Moshe Rabbeinu's study hall for people to sit on. 
The disgrace was that there was only one Yehoshua bin Nun!  
There were certainly other people capable of cleaning up the Beis Medrash  
and turning the lights on and off as did Yehoshua.  
But although "somebody had to do it", only one person actually did it. 
The םינקז realized that they too had the same attributes that Yehoshua had.  
They could have exerted themselves  
and had the same loyalty and faithfulness to Moshe as did Yehoshua.  
But they did not do so.  
As a result of this fact they now bemoaned,  
"Woe to us for our shame and disgrace, that we did not make this effort." 
(https://torah.org/torah-portion/ravfrand-5765-pinchas/) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   59 
ד"סב 
Set It Up Clean 
In 1860, the neighborhood of Mishkenot Sha’ananim  
was the first city to be built outside the walls of Yerushalyim.  
The bye-laws for this new and poor neighborhood 
contain a number of intriguing clauses governing the obligation  
to preserve the new towns’ cleanliness, in public and even in the private domain: 
• Every inhabitant of the Mishkenot Sha’ananim neighborhood  
shall remove from his house on a daily basis all garbage and any unclean matter.  
• He shall also sprinkle clean water on the floor of the rooms of his house  
at least once a day. 
• Every inhabitant shall not to cast away any garbage in front of his house,  
and shall clean up all the areas around his dwelling,  
and throw away the garbage in the designated area and cover it immediately… 
• The bathhouse and the mikveh shall remain clean from any dirt at all times… 
Similar provisions are contained in the 1889 bye-laws  
for the emerging “Mea Shearim” neighborhood, which was founded in 1874:  
““And your camp shall be holy” – this is a positive mitzvah.  
Therefore, all the members and residents of our society ‘Mea Shearim’  are obligated  
• to take care to keep the place clean,  
both in the public and also in the private domain.  
• The same applies to the cleanliness of the latrines,  
so that no damage should be caused to the purity of the air.  
• Garbage and fetid water shall similarly not be spilled.  
Anyone who transgresses this twice, shall be punished on the third occasion.  
And may it go well with those who take heed of this command.” 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   60 
ד"סב 
Organized In Room = Organized In Thought 
The story is told of a father who traveled long and far  
to see how his son was learning in Yeshiva.  
He finally arrived and asked the Rosh Yeshiva how his son was doing. 
The Rosh Yeshiva told him he was doing well  
and offered to take him to the bais hamedresh to see his son. 
The father refused, as he did not want to disturb his son while he was learning. 
However, the father requested to see his son’s bedroom. 
The father went to the bedroom, saw that the bed was made,  
and everything was neat and clean. 
the father said “now I see that my son is learning well,  
for if he is organized in his room, 
he is organized in his thoughts and is learning well.” 
With that the father asked to send regards to his son, 
and headed back home. 
             
In Telz Cleveland, Rav Gifter zt”l was very makpid  
that talmidim look neat and clean, and that the dorm room is kept organized. 
If a talmid did not make his bed,  
he would find a note on his bed asking him to please make it. 
This was not just a cleanliness tactic,  
but an element of enhancing chashivus for oneself,  
and enabling the talmidim to improve their learning, through being clean and neat. 
(Heard from Rabbi Moshe Leibowitz) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   61 
ד"סב 
The Gemara Lesson  
(a joke about cleanliness)  
A young man knocked on the door of the noted scholar Rabbi Shwartz.  
“My name is Sean Goldstein,” he says. “I’ve come because I wish to study Talmud.” 
“Do you know Aramaic or Hebrew?” the rabbi asks.  
“No,” replies the young man. 
“Have you studied Torah?” asks the Rabbi. 
“No, Rabbi. But don’t worry. I graduated with a doctorate in philosophy.  
I would just like to round out my education with a little study of the Talmud.” 
“I seriously doubt you are ready to study Talmud.  
I am willing to examine you in logic, and if you pass that test, I will teach you Talmud.” 
The young man agreed. 
Rabbi Shwartz holds up two fingers.  
“Two men come down a chimney.  
One comes out with a clean face, the other comes out with a dirty face.  
Which one washes his face?” 
The young man stares at the rabbi. “Is that the test in logic?” 
The rabbi nods. 
”The one with the dirty face washes his face”, he answers easily. 
“Wrong. The one with the clean face washes his face.  
Examine the simple logic. 
The one with the dirty face looks at the one with the clean face 
and thinks his face is clean.  
The one with the clean face looks at the one with the dirty face  
and thinks his face is dirty.  
So the one with the clean face washes his face.” 
“Very clever,” Goldstein says. “Give me another test.” 
The rabbi again holds up two fingers.  
“Two men come down a chimney.  
One comes out with a clean face, the other comes out with a dirty face.  
Which one washes his face?” 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   62 
ד"סב 
“We have already established that the one with the clean face washes his face.” 
“Wrong. Each one washes his face.  
Examine the simple logic.  
The one with the dirty face looks at the one with the clean face  
and thinks his face is clean.  
The one with the clean face looks at the one with the dirty face  
and thinks his face is dirty.  
So the one with the clean face washes his face.  
When the one with the dirty face sees the one with the clean face wash his face,  
he also washes his face. So each one washes his face.” 
“I didn’t think of that,” says Goldstein. “Test me again.” 
The rabbi holds up two fingers. “Two men come down a chimney.  
One comes out with a clean face, the other comes out with a dirty face.  
Which one washes his face?” 
“Each one washes his face.” 
“Wrong. Neither one washes his face.  
Examine the simple logic.  
The one with the dirty face looks at the one with the clean face  
and thinks his face is clean.  
The one with the clean face looks at the one with the dirty face  
and thinks his face is dirty.  
But when the one with the clean face  
sees that the one with the dirty face doesn’t wash his face, he also doesn’t wash his face.  
So neither one washes his face.” 
Goldstein is desperate. “Please give me one more test.” 
He groans, though, when the rabbi lifts two fingers.  
“Two men come down a chimney.  
One comes out with a clean face, the other comes out with a dirty face.  
Which one washes his face?” 
“Neither one washes his face.” 
“Wrong. Tell me, how is it possible for two men to come down the same chimney,  
and for one to come out with a clean face and the other with a dirty face?  
Now to you understand the logic of Gemara???” 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   63 
 ד"סב 
 
 
 
 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   64 
Areas To Keep Clean and Neat 
 
Wash our hands and faces, especially after eating 
Brush our teeth 
Comb our hair 
Clean clothing – no stains 
Tucked in 
 
Ourselves 
Pick up garbage from floor and place in garbage can 
Put away siddurim, seforim, and books when done 
Arrange chairs and tables to be straight 
 
Shul 
Pick up papers from floor and keep items in locker neatly 
Throw out wrappers and bottles after snack time 
Put away supplies at end of learning. 
Empty locker & desk from unnecessary items 
 
Classroom 
Ensure area is clean when we are done 
Ensure all tissues end up where they belong 
Wipe down counter by sink if wet 
 
Bathroom 
Throw out plate when we are done or put in sink if applicable 
Put away bencher 
Sweep the floor 
 
Lunchroom 
Put away food when finished eating 
Help wash and dry the dishes 
Throw out wrappers and disposable utensils 
 
Kitchen 
Put away toys when finished playing 
 
Playroom 
Make bed upon waking 
Hang up clothing or put in laundry basket 
Throw out food & wrappers, and bring dishes to kitchen 
 
Bedroom 
 
 
 
 
 
Left blank for you to fill in 
 
 
 
 
ד"סב 
Clean Classroom Contest 
Areas to be graded on 
Rebbi’s/Teachers Desk 
Talmidim’s Desks 
Knapsacks 
Lockers 
Floor 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   65 
ד"סב 
Don’t Be A Shloomp 
Marvelous Middos Machine vol. 2 – Abie Rotenberg     
(Song available in folder) 
Don’t be a shloomp, don’t make a mess, 
Don’t wipe those chocolatey hands on your dress, 
Tie up those shoes, and tuck in and that shirt, 
Go wash your hands and face, get rid of the dirt. 
CHORUS: 
You gotta be neat, you gotta be clean, 
Let Mommy take a break from her washing machine, 
And all Jewish children they will be known, 
For Seder Venikayon. 
Does Mom follow you with a mop and a pail, 
‘Cause every which way that you go, you’re leavin’ a trail 
And after you eat, does everyone know 
‘Cause half the food is on the floor or on your clothes. 
CHORUS: 
You gotta be neat, you gotta be clean, 
Let Mommy take a break from her washing machine, 
And all Jewish children they will be known, 
For Seder Venikayon. 
And in the morning, does Mom blow her fuse, 
When she hears her children cry, “We can’t find our shoes!” 
Or when you go to your room and open the door, 
There’s so many toys about, you can’t see the floor! 
CHORUS: 
You gotta be neat, you gotta be clean, 
Let Mommy take a break from her washing machine, 
And all Jewish children they will be known, 
For Seder Venikayon. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   66 
ד"סב 
WEEK 5
I Am Royalty 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   67 
ד"סב 
A Kingdom of Royalty 
When Hashem prepare to give us the  הרות He said: 
"
)'ו ,ט"י ,תומש( "
שֹודָק י ֹוגְו
םיִנֲהֹ כ תֶׁכֶׁל ְמַמ י ִל  וי ְה ִ ת םֶׁ תַאְו ׁ
. 
And you will be for Me a kingdom of Kohanim and a holy nation. 
Hashem did not just say that we will be a holy nation  
but we will be a kingdom of kohanim.  
We may not be from Shevet Levi, but we are still a kingdom of Kohanim – royal priests. 
Rabbeinu Avraham ben HaRambam, explains that a Kohein is a leader,  
a person who sets an example for his followers. 
Similarly, the Jewish people are meant to set an example for the rest of the world.  
Every individual Jew is responsible to be part of that example. 
Hashem is charging us with a very important role in the world –  
We are His royal representatives. 
Yes, royalty comes with tremendous perks.  
It also comes with tremendous responsibility. 
Let’s appreciate who we are,  
and carry ourselves and behave with dignity deserving of royalty! 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   68 
ד"סב 
Take Him Down 
Hashem in the Torah commands us (Ki Seitzei 21:23) 
not to leave the body of person executed by Beis Din hanging overnight  
“for it is degrading to Hashem.”  
Rashi explains this by an analogy to a case of two identical twins,  
one of whom becomes a bandit while the other becomes the king.  
If the bandit is captured and hanged,  
anyone who sees the body will think that the king has been executed,  
which is certainly a disgrace to the royal personage.  
Similarly, since Klal Yisrael has been created in Hashem’s image  
it is a disgrace to Hashem if the body is left hanging overnight, 
for we have within us a piece of Hashem. 
Wow!  
We are royalty! 
We must keep this in mind always,  
for we misrepresent Hashem if we fail to act in an appropriate manner.  
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   69 
ד"סב 
Our Father, Our King 
On fast days and throughout the Aseres Yimei Teshuva  
we say the הלפת composed by Rabi Akiva  
of  ונכלמ וניבא – our Father, our King. 
Well, if my Father is a King,  
that means that I am a prince!! 
If I am a prince, that means it is incumbent upon me  
to behave like royalty and realize my special role. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   70 
ד"סב 
Speak Like Royalty 
When 'ה commanded  חנ to bring the animals into the הבית, He said: 
ה ָרֹּהְט הָ נֶני ֵא רֶ ׁשֲא הָמֵהְ בַה ן ִמ ו ה ָרֹּוהְ טַה הָמֵהְ בַה ן ִמ 
The gemara (Pesachim 3b) tells us that  
although Hashem is very careful with every letter and nothing is extra in the Torah,  
and it would have been shorter to have written 
הָמֵהְ בַה ן ִמ ו
הָאֵמְטַה 
Hashem specifically told  חנ and recorded in the הרות the words ה ָרֹּהְט הָ נֶני ֵא רֶ ׁשֲא 
to teach us the importance of refined speech. 
         
A young man was discussing a certain topic  
with the Chazon Ish, Rabbi Avrohom Yeshaya Karelitz.  
In the midst of his conversation, he blurted out, “It’s sheker (false)!”   
The Chazon Ish, with his highly sensitive ears, turned to him and said,  
“It’s better to say it’s not emes (true).” 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   71 
ד"סב 
The pen of the heart and the messenger of the mind 
When Yaakov Avinu came in to his father Yitzchok Avinu to receive the brochos  
in place of Eisav he said, "Please arise,". 
Rashi tells us that Yitzchok was perplexed –  
as the use of the word "please" was out of character for Eisav.  
In fact when Eisav came in later, he said roughly to his father, "Arise, my father!" 
This behavior does not seem to correspond with what Chazal tell us  
about Eisav and his tremendous kibbud Av -  
how is it possible that Eisav, garbed in the best clothing to honor his father,  
could have spoken so disrespectfully to him?  
Even if he hadn't revered his father, even the rudest child, would remember to say 
please and to speak in the kindest, sweetest tone possible, to get the brachos? 
The Chovos Halevavos (Shaar HaBitachon Perek 5) says: 
“The tongue is the pen of the heart and the messenger of the mind” 
While it may be possible to pretend with our other limbs,  
our tongues represent our true selves. 
For Eisav, as careful as he was with his Kibud Av, his true essence came out when he 
spoke, and he couldn’t bring himself to talk in a refined and polite manner. 
Conversely, although Yaakov was disguising himself as Eisav, and he knew what was 
at stake, his true essence too came out, and  
he could not force himself to speak impolitely, thereby arousing his father's suspicion. 
(Pinnacle of Creation, Rav Henoch Leibowitz) 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   72 
ד"סב 
Sleeping in His Clothes 
Rabbi Shimon Schwab zt”l held a rabbinical position in Germany in 1933,  
prior to immigrating to the United States.  
He had given a Shabbos drosho that was misunderstood to be criticizing Hitler.  
The Gestapo called Rabbi Schwab in for questioning.  
He explained the misunderstanding and was freed  
but was told that they were going to investigate him.  
Over the next two months, he did not know what the Gestapo would do to him.  
During that entire time, he went to sleep at night wearing his clothes, not his pajamas.  
When asked about it, he explained his unusual behavior.  
Another Rav was recently executed by the Gestapo in the middle of the night. 
He had been wearing his pajamas and was left hanging in a public place.  
Rabbi Schwab was afraid  
that he, too, would be arrested and hung in the middle of the night.  
He felt that it would be a chilul Hashem, a desecration of Hashem’s name,  
for a Rav to be left hanging while wearing his pajamas.  
Therefore, he slept in his clothes  
for the entire two months that his life was in the balance. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   73 
ד"סב 
Crew, Not Passenger 
Rav Elchonon Wasserman Hy”d explained with a mashal 
why we have 613 mitzvos while the rest of the nations received only seven. 
When a ship embarks on a voyage,  
the passengers are expected to follow a few basic rules.  
Don’t damage the ship, don’t stand on the railings,  
along with some other basic rules that ensure the journey proceeds smoothly.  
The crew, however, have a far more complex manual of detailed instructions  
since they are responsible for navigating the ship safely through the vast ocean,  
ensuring it reaches its intended destination. 
We as Yidden are the crew of the world,  
charged with steering the ship of creation toward its ultimate purpose:  
a world filled with Kiddush Hashem, where Hashem is recognized as King. 
We answer not to the passengers, but to the owner of the ship - Hashem Himself, 
with unwavering commitment to the manual He has given us: the Torah. 
As crew members, we bear an immense responsibility.  
We hold a deep sense of achrayus and achdus towards our fellow crew members. 
At the same time, we interact with the passengers with pleasantness and sensitivity.  
We recognize their dignity and role, treating them with respect and kindness.  
As crew members, we must maintain our distinct identity,  
mindful not to be influenced or distracted  
by the desires and entertainment of the passengers form of entertainment.  
We are noticeably set apart in our role  
through the way we dress, speak, and conduct ourselves.  
Remember, when the ship reaches its destination –  
a world perfected in its recognition of Hashem,  
our reward as the crew will be beyond measure! 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   74 
ד"סב 
Keep Smiling 
The yeshivah bachurim were surprised when an elderly non-Jew approached them,  
but they were even more surprised by what he said.  
“You know, I’ve been meaning to tell you young men  
how much I appreciate certain things about you,” the stranger remarked.  
“Whenever I see you, you are always dressed in such a respectful and dignified way.  
And the most impressive thing of all is that you are always smiling.  
I can see the satisfaction on your faces,  
and it really is such a pleasure for me to behold.” 
The mood and state of mind of a ben Torah  
are an important part of shaping the impression that others will have.  
Rav Avraham Pam zt”l pointed out 
that it is of vital importance  
for a Yid to always to project an air of joy and contentment, 
in order to demonstrate how wonderful a life of Torah truly is. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   75 
ד"סב 
Fateful Friendship 
Eretz Yisroel was a haven for thousands of European Jewish refugees  
escaping from the Nazis, yemach shemam.  
Among these refugees was Herbert Froehlich,  
a young man who arrived from Germany in 1935.  
He rented a room in Haifa from a woman who owned a boarding house.  
After Herbert had lived there for many weeks,  
the woman asked him whether he would accept a roommate.  
Realizing that his landlady needed the extra income  
to offset the difficult economic situation, Herbert readily agreed. 
As fate would have it,  
his roommate turned out to be the only non-Jew in the boarding house.  
Being a good-natured fellow, Herbert welcomed his roommate warmly  
and they established a close friendship and a mutually deep respect for one another.  
Herbert learned that his roommate's parents had sent him to Palestine from Sweden 
in order to learn the British banking system.  
After being invited to join in various Jewish trips and group activities,  
including Shabbos meals, Herbert's roommate gained an appreciation  
for the Jewish religion and the Jewish people. 
After several months, Herbert's roommate completed his education in Palestine  
and prepared to return to Europe.  
As the two friends tearfully bid each other farewell,  
Herbert's roommate removed his ski cap from his head, handed it to Herbert, and said,  
"I want you to keep this as a sign of our everlasting friendship." 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   76 
ד"סב 
Just a few years later,  
the world turned a blind eye as six million Jews were slaughtered in Europe.  
Only a small number of non-Jews stood up to save Jewish lives.  
Among these heroes  
was a young secretary at the Swedish Diplomatic Mission in Budapest  
whose name was Raoul Wallenberg.  
He was instrumental in saving thousands of Jews by securing visas for them.  
To this day his whereabouts are unknown,  
as Raoul Wallenberg was arrested by Russian soldiers  
while trying to rescue a group of Hungarian Jews during the last days of the war.  
It is believed that he died in one of Stalin's prisons or in Siberia. 
Many could not understand  
Raoul Wallenberg's unusual sensitivity towards the Jewish people,  
but Herbert Froehlich did.  
You see, Raoul was Herbert's roommate.  
Herbert believed that Raoul's association with his Jewish friends in Palestine  
was instrumental in creating his tremendous desire to help the Jews.  
As for Herbert, he never forgot his friend Raoul and wore his ski cap every night,  
even as it tattered and frayed with age.  
Thousands of lives were saved,  
no doubt in part, because one Jew made a Kiddush Hashem! 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   77 
ד"סב 
The Heart of The Nation 
In November 22, 1963,  
the United States was shaken to the core  
by the assassination of President John F. Kennedy.  
The president was shot on a Friday morning, and the funeral was held Monday.  
Private and public schools throughout the country were closing on that day.  
Dr. Joseph Kamenetzky, the director of Torah Umesorah,  
asked Rav Yaakov Kamenetzky zt”l whether their schools should follow suit. 
Rav Yaakov advised that the schools should definitely be closed,  
quoting the Kuzari’s teaching  
that the Jewish people’s relationship with the nations of the world  
is analogous to the relationship between the heart and the rest of the body.  
The Jews are supposed to be the “heart” of the world  
and teach morality to all the nations.  
If such a horrific wrong could be committed,  
it meant that the Jewish people had failed, in some measure,  
in carrying out their mission. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   78 
ד"סב 
The Regal Rebbetzin 
A baalas teshuvah who grew up in a completely assimilated family in the Ukraine 
once related how a certain rebbetzin who came to their town 
made a deep impression on her.  
“She had a truly regal appearance.  
She was always well-dressed and adorned with beautiful jewelry.  
Someone said that she was wearing a wig,  
but none of us believed it; it looked so real!” 
But the real shock came when someone said  
that the Rebbetzin had eight children back in America,  
five of whom were already married.  
We were all astounded, not just by the fact that she had so many children,  
but by the fact that she looked so young and vibrant, not at all like a grandmother.  
We had always been told that childrearing was a burdensome task  
and most people could barely manage with one or two children,  
yet this woman had been the mother of eight children  
and always looked better than many other women I knew.”  
The outward appearance of the rebbetzin,  
her aristocratic demeanor and beauty,  
played a tremendous role in bringing a Jewish girl back to Yiddishkeit. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   79 
ד"סב 
Front Page News 
A number of years back,  
Prince Harry of England was caught drunk driving  
and it became front page news.  
Many others sadly also drive while intoxicated,  
yet their crime doesn’t become front page news. 
Why do you think Prince Harry’s incident became front page news, 
while for most others it is not? 
What are some ways that you think a prince needs to act  
in public & in private?? 
A prince should… 
A prince should not… 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   80 
ד"סב 
It Could Be You 
Yaakov Shwekey (video in folder) 
The view is always the highest, standing on the shoulders of giants, 
How could we even compare, to elders wise and so pious, 
But in this hour, one person’s power, 
No generation has ever seen, do you know what one pure deed could mean? 
It could be you, it could be us, what you can do, is glorious 
The world is waiting to see 
It could be you, it could be us, we know it’s true, we have to trust, 
It all depends on me 
Today, the way you behave, can make tomorrow’s front page, 
Is there anything you would change, if you knew you were on the world stage? 
No more escaping, the world is waiting, 
For you to hear the call, will you make the choice to change it all? 
It could be you, it could be us, what you can do, is glorious 
The world is waiting to see 
It could be you, it could be us, we know it’s true, we have to trust, 
It all depends on me 
Stop taking yourself for granted, all the gifts you've been handed, 
An act of kindness to another, can be felt across the planet, 
There’s no denial, that you’re so vital, 
To the people you come from, they’re all hoping you’ll be the one, 
It could be you, it could be us, what you can do, is glorious 
The world is waiting to see 
It could be you, it could be us, we know it’s true, we have to trust, 
It all depends on me 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   81 
ד"סב 
Kiddush Hashem 
Marvelous Midos Machine vol 3 - Abie Rotenberg (song in folder) 
When you’re on the bus and it’s so full, there’s only one more seat 
And you rush so fast to grab it, leaving others on their feet 
You just may not realize that when people look at you 
They think that you have no respect, 
what an awful thing to do (what an awful thing to do). 
When you’re in the supermarket, to help your mommy shop 
And you zoom with your cart and it crashes down the shelf with soda pop 
Know there would not be a mess if you hadn’t been so wild 
And no one would be whispering: 
I’m glad that’s not my child (I’m glad that’s not my child). 
CHORUS: 
You’ve got to show the world what the Torah teaches you 
Let everybody see how fun it is to be a Jew, 
And when you act that way, I’ll bet your friends will do the same 
Get out that menschlichkeit, ’cause that’s Kiddush Hashem. 
When you’re at your friend’s Bar Mitzvah 
and you thought you’d play a joke, 
So you dropped a big green olive in Gedaliah Epstein’s coke 
The waiter looked at you and said: it seems to be a fact 
That Jewish kids are not so nice, 
they don’t know how to act (they don’t know how to act). 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   82 
ד"סב 
CHORUS: 
You’ve got to show the world what the Torah teaches you 
Let everybody see how fun it is to be a Jew, 
And when you act that way, I’ll bet your friends will do the same 
Get out that menschlichkeit, ’cause that’s Kiddush Hashem. 
When your teacher, Mrs. Applegeese, says kindly quiet down 
But you kept on making silly jokes, acting like a clown 
These kids are nothing special, she’ll be saying to herself 
They fool around and misbehave 
like anybody else (like anybody else). 
CHORUS: 
You’ve got to show the world what the Torah teaches you 
Let everybody see how fun it is to be a Jew, 
And when you act that way, I’ll bet your friends will do the same 
Get out that menschlichkeit, ’cause that’s Kiddush Hashem. 
That’s Kiddush Hashem. 
For corrections, questions, or additional material to add, please email bplotzker.ohrreuven@gmail.com   83 


 ד"סב 
Rav Meir Shapiro 
והי בר בקעי 'ר ןב ריאמ הד משש ל"צז ןו 
 
 
Born:  'ז רדא תמר " ז 
Niftar: ןושחרמ 'ז  ד"צרת 
 
Compiled from material of Rabbi Tzvi Moshe Schultz - chinuchchaburah@gmail.com, 
Rabbi Avrohom Katz, Mrs. tova Greenblatt 
If you have additional information please email: bplotzker@ohrreuven.com 
 
Biography 
Rabbi Meir Shapiro was born in Shotz, Poland, on 7 Adar, 5647 (1887). He was descended 
from noted Chasidic luminaries (Rabbi Pinchas of Koritz was his great-great-grandfather) 
and his grandfather was the rabbi of Monastritz, Poland. Because of his unusual gifts of 
memory and understanding, the child Meir was already known for his genius. He was also 
a student of tremendous diligence. He had great intellectual curiosity, teaching himself 
astronomy and mathematics and soon developed into a great Torah scholar of note at a 
very young age. He studied with his grandfather in Monastritz for a number of years, When 
his grandfather died in 1903, he returned home to Shotz where his parents lived. There, in 
addition to his Talmudic studies he studied kabalah with the rabbi of the town, Rabbi Shalom 
Moscowitz (later a noted Chasidic rebbe in London, England). In spite of his young age, he 
achieved expertise in this area of Jewish knowledge as well. His charismatic personality also 
began to develop and he came to the notice of many of the great rabbis of Poland, such as 
Rabbi Yitzchak Shmelkes of Lemberg (Lvov) and Rabbi Shalom Schwadron of Berzhan. He 
was ordained as a rabbi at the age of eighteen by these two luminaries and he was extolled 
as well by the great Chasidic leader, Rabbi Yisrael of Vishnitz, and by Rabbi Aryeh Leib 
Horwitz of Stanislav and Rabbi Meir Arik. Thus, at a very young age his reputation for 
Torah greatness was already firmly established. 
When he was nineteen, he married and moved to Tarnopol, one of the main Jewish centers 
in Galicia. His wife’s family was among the leaders of the Jewish community and Rabbi Meir 
soon became an educational force in the community. Rabbi Meir at that time also became 
a chassid of Rabbi Yisrael of Tchortokov. He remained a Tchortkover chassid all of his life. 
In Tarnopol, Rabbi Meir wrote a Torah commentary in a pilpulistic style, called Imrei Daas. 
Even though the book was a work of innovation and genius, it never gained distribution 
due to the fact that almost all of the printed copies, together with Rabbi Meir’s great private 
library, were destroyed in the First World War by Russian shellfire. The only remaining two 
copies were buried with Rabbi Meir Shapiro in his grave. 
When Rabbi Meir was twenty-three years old he was appointed as the rabbi of Galina, a 
town near Lemberg. In Galina, with the encouragement and approval of the Tchortkover 
Rebbe, Rabbi Meir founded a school called “Bnei Torah” which included vocational training 
in its curriculum. He also created a yeshiva from which many Torah scholars were produced. 
His phenomenal fund-raising abilities began there in Galina where he established proper 
quarters for his educational projects and paid proper salaries to those who taught therein. 
There he also became interested in wider political activity and began to be active in the 
programs of Agudat Yisrael in Poland.  
 
During World War I, Galina, part of the Austro-Hungarian empire, was damaged severely 
by the invading Russian forces. The Jewish community fled to Tarnopol and Lemberg and 
Rabbi Meir Shapiro did likewise. He never returned to Galina. After the war, Rabbi Meir 
became the rabbi of Sunik (Sanuk) and there he rebuilt his yeshiva “Bnei Torah” and helped 
restore the religious services of that community, which was also severely damaged by the 
wars that engulfed Poland from 1914 to 1921. In 1922, the rabbis and Chasidic leaders of 
Poland and Galicia gathered in Warsaw to discuss how to deal with the chaos in Jewish life 
caused by the ravages of the wars, and of the Bolshevik revolution and its aftermath. 
Rabbi Meir Shapiro delivered an electrifying and challenging speech demanding that the 
rabbis now became activists in their communities and no longer merely passive scholars. His 
words had a dramatic effect on the gathering and propelled him into a leading role in Jewish 
public life in Poland. He was recommended by the rebbe of Gur to become the head of 
Agudas Yisrael in Poland and in 1923 he assumed that role. He was elected as a member of 
the Polish parliament and distinguished himself there with his political and diplomatic 
abilities. There were many open anti-Semitic members of parliament and he confronted them 
head on. When one of them remarked that there was a sign in a public park in Silesia that 
prohibited Jews and dogs from entering, Rabbi Shapiro retorted: “Well, I guess now that 
neither of us will enter that park.” 
At the international convention of Agudas Yisrael in Vienna in August 1923, Rabbi Meir 
Shapiro proposed the idea of the daf hayomi – the study of one page of the Talmud daily 
(of the 2,711 daf) and in unison by Jews throughout the world. His proposal was 
enthusiastically accepted at that convention. It is no exaggeration to say that this idea and 
learning program of the daf hayomi is his lasting legacy to the Jewish people. Rabbi Meir 
Shapiro had no children. His great yeshiva, Yeshivas Chachmei Lublin, was desecrated and 
destroyed in the Holocaust and never regained prominence again after the war. However, 
the daf hayomi project continues to grow in popularity and acceptance. It is through the 
learning of the daf hayomi by tens of thousands of Jews daily that Rabbi Meir Shapiro gains 
immortality and eternity amongst the great leaders of Judaism. 
 
Though the daf hayomi is still officially a project of Agudas Yisrael, it has crossed all 
political borders in the Jewish world and can truly be seen as a national project of Torah 
learning for all Jews no matter what their political affiliation may be. The cycle of 
studying daf hayomi is by itself a testament to the greatness and creativity of its progenitor, 
Rabbi Meir Shapiro. The righteous, even after their death, are still deemed to be alive. 
 
 
 
In 1924, Rabbi Shapiro became the rabbi of Pietrikov, a position of great prestige. He 
published one book of rabbinic responsa “Ohr Hameir” but most of his brilliant writings 
never saw the light of publication. He threw himself into the establishment of a great yeshiva, 
which he envisioned would produce the religious leadership of Poland. He wanted to raise 
the prestige of the Torah student and the community rabbi in the eyes of the masses of 
Polish Jewry. This prestige had been sorely diminished by the ravages of the Haskala (the 
“enlightened ones”), Socialism and Communism, as well by secular Zionism. He envisioned 
creating a magnificent institution, both physically imposing and spiritually inspiring, that 
would help stem the tide of assimilation and loss of Torah observance that was then affecting 
Polish Jewry. He traveled to America to raise funds for this great project. 
 
His influence and impression on American Jewry was profound and inspiring and his visits 
were financially successful. A wealthy Jew in Lublin gave him a magnificent plot of land in 
that famous ancient city upon which to build the yeshiva building. He called his yeshiva 
“Yeshivas Chachmei Lublin” and after protracted delays and financial difficulties, the great 
and imposing building, containing among other treasures, a full-scale model of the Second 
Temple and a library of over 30,000 volumes, was dedicated and opened in May, 1930. 
Over one hundred thousand Jews took part in the celebration of its opening. The students 
in the yeshiva were of the highest caliber. In order to be accepted into the Yeshiva, a bachur 
had to know at least 200 daf gemara by heart! The yeshiva produced many great leaders in 
Israel until its tragic end at the hands of the Germans and Poles in World War II. 
Rabbi Meir left Pietrikov and became the rabbi of Lublin, the home of his great yeshiva. 
However, the strain of maintaining the yeshiva financially took its toll on Rabbi Meir. He 
therefore consented to leave his beloved Lublin to become the rabbi in Lodz on the 
condition that the community in Lodz would assume much of the financial burden of 
supporting the yeshiva in Lublin. However, he never made it to Lodz. He had planned to 
spend Pesach of 1934 in the Land of Israel. Yet, in September 1933 he had a premonition of 
impending sickness and arranged for a life insurance policy on himself for $30,000 with 
the yeshiva as its beneficiary. 
In October 1933 he fell ill with a viral type of pneumonia and on 7 Cheshvan, 5694 he died 
at the age of only forty-six. He was buried in Lublin but his remains were reburied twenty
five years later in Jerusalem on 26 Elul, 5718 at Har Hamenuchos. His passing would, in our 
hindsight, mark the dreadful harbinger of the demise of Polish Jewry itself a few short years 
after. The Jewish world has not since seen his equal in the combination of Torah scholarship 
and greatness, Chasidic warmth, political astuteness, fund-raising talents and creative 
programming and initiative. The Jewish world was orphaned by his demise. 
His daf hayomi project lives on as a comfort to us.     [From Jewishhistory.org] 
 
 
Yeshivas Chachmei Lublin, Rav Meir Shapiro’s Yeshivah  
as it looked during his lifetime 
 
 
The building as it looks today after being renovated by the Yidden in Poland 
 
 
Stories 
 
 
Rav Meir Shapiro’s Mother 
When R’ Meir Shapiro was a young child, his mother hired a melamed to study with him. 
When she ran out of money to pay the melamed, she pawned her jewelry. One day there 
was a big snowstorm and the melamed didn’t come. R’ Meir’s mother cried for a very long 
time that morning. Young Meir tried to reassure his mother. ‘I’m sure the melamed will 
come tomorrow and we will make up what we missed today,’ he said. ”’Meir,’ she replied, 
‘it is important that kvius be maintained. It is a great loss to miss a day of learning. That’s 
why I’m so sad!” R’ Meir Shapiro later gave his mother part of- the credit for his idea of 
introducing the concept of Daf Yomi. (Rebetzin Kanievsky) 
 
Candle Money 
 When Meir was a young boy, his parents gave him an allowance so that he could 
buy sweets and toys.  But Meir never wasted his money on that.  He spent his money on 
candles so he could have enough light to continue learning after dark.   
 
To Honor Torah 
 In those days, a yeshiva consisted of only a Bais Medrash, a house to learn in.  The 
students had to take care of finding a place to eat and sleep.  Rav Meir Shapiro felt that 
this was not proper for the Torah students.  He built a beautiful yeshiva in Lublin—the first 
with a dormitory, dining room and all the things a bochur needed.  In this way, the 
bochurim could devote their whole time to learning.     
 
Reusing a Nail 
Someone asked Rav Meir Shapiro about the fact that he had been a Rav in numerous 
different places. He looked the man in the eye, and said “a strong nail can be removed from 
its place (when it is finished its use) and be used again”. Another version: he said a rov is 
like a nail, if he has a good head, he can be pulled out and used again somewhere else 
 
 
  
 
Nor B’simcha 
Rav Meir’s last moments: The hour of night grew later and later. On a piece of paper he 
asked that he be shown all the prescriptions which the doctors had written. When they 
were handed him, he went through them and selected the one for a preparation to cleanse 
the throat and the respiratory organs and he asked that a new supply be gotten for him. 
Every few minutes he kept washing his hands while his mind was obviously immersed in 
distant thoughts. The struggle that he had to make to breathe was heartbreaking. One 
could feel the frightful, racking agony that he had to undergo to try to get a bit of air into 
his lungs, and try as he would; he kept failing, because the channels were blocked. 
On a piece of paper, he scrawled a request to be carried into another room. When the 
transfer was accomplished, he asked for a change into a clean shirt and fresh Tzitzis. Needless 
to say, his wishes were carried out. But then his wife noticed a change in his appearance, 
and she began weeping emotionally. Rav Meir did his best to calm and console her. 
In a broken, barely legible scrawl he wrote, "Let everyone drink l'Chayim!" Some liquor was 
poured out into tiny glasses, and all who were there drank and wished him l'Chayim, "to 
life!" Then he shook hands with them all, one by one, holding each one's hand in his for a 
long time. And now he gave his instruction, "Make a Rikud (a little dance) to the words, 
'b'cha batchu avoseinu' ("In You our fathers trusted, and You rescued them"; Tehilim 22:5). 
His wishes were obeyed: they joined hands, put hands on shoulders, and lifted their feet in 
rhythm as they sang the holy words to the melody which he himself had composed. 
It was clear that the end was approaching. 
As he noticed some of the dancing students sobbing, clearly and distinctly he pronounced 
two Yiddish words: "Nor b'simcha" ("Only with joy!") and was niftar. 
 
 
  
 
Saying Birchas Hamazon 
 
Reb Shimon is an elderly Yid who lives in Yerushalayim. When he was young, he lived in 
Lublin (before the Holocaust). Reb Meir Shapiro zt'l once came to his cheder to test the 
students. Generally, after testing the children, Reb Meir Shapiro would distribute gifts or 
sweets to the children, but this time Reb Meir Shapiro didn’t have anything to give them. 
"Instead of a gift, I will tell you a wonderful segulah," Reb Meir Shapiro told them. "If you 
will follow my counsel, you will be successful and always lead a tranquil life. He told them 
about the wonders that happen to people who say birchas hamazon properly. He quoted 
the Ba'ch who says, "Whoever recites birchas hamazaon with kavanah, neither wrath or 
destruction will ever befall him." He then told them the Chinuch, who says, "Whoever is 
careful with birchas hamazon will have parnassah bekavod his entire life." He also told them 
the Be'er Heitav who concludes, "Those who are careful will always say the birchas hamazon 
from a siddur and not by heart." Reb Meir Shapiro quoted these sources and concluded, 
"This is my present to you." 
 
Reb Shimon took the lesson to heart. He decided right then and there that he would be 
careful with birchas hamazon. He kept this kabalah throughout his entire life. In cheder, his 
friends would bench quickly and go out to play, while he lingered behind, in order to bench 
properly. It was challenging, but he didn’t want to abandon this wonderful gift that Reb 
Meir Shapiro gave him. 
 
A few years later, the Nazis invaded Poland. Reb Shimon was standing in line for a 'selektzia.' 
Whoever was short was being sent to the left for execution. Reb Shimon prayed that he 
should be saved from 'wrath and destruction' in the merit of birchas hamazon. When it was 
his turn, he stood on his toes to appear higher; the Nazi signaled him to the right. His life 
was saved in the merit of birchas hamazon.   Soon afterwards, Reb Shimon found himself 
standing in line again. This time, each person had to tell the Nazi in charge what he could 
do for parnassah. Reb Shimon didn’t know what he could say. He was only a teenager, taken 
away from yeshiva to this cursed place. As he waited in line he prayed, "In the merit of 
birchas hamazon, which is mesugal for parnassah, Hashem, please support me…" 
 
The person behind him in line tapped him on the shoulder and said, "Tell the Nazi that you 
are a cook and that I'm your helper." He said this and they were both sent to work in the 
kitchen. As the Chinuch promised, he had enough food to eat because he was careful with 
birchas hamazon. 
  
  
 
In the camps, Reb Shimon continued to be extremely careful with birchas hamazon. For 
example, if he understood that he wouldn’t have enough time to say the birchas hamazon 
properly, then he wouldn’t eat bread to begin with. 
 
Once, a Nazi saw Shimon working in the kitchen and he wasn't pleased that he had this 
'good' position, surrounded with food. "What are you doing here? You look like a young 
child." "I work here," Shimon explained. "I am a cook." The Nazi took Shimon outside and 
showed him a stony area, outside the kitchen. "Dig a two meter ditch here. You have two 
hours to finish, or you will be buried in it." He gave him a tiny shovel. At that time, the 
Nazis were building trenches to hide in, in case they would be attacked by the Russians. But 
the task the Nazi gave Shimon was absolutely impossible. The ground was covered with 
heavy stones, he only had two hours to finish the chore, and he was given only a small 
shovel to work with. Reb Shimon raised his eyes to heaven and said, "I say birchas hamazon 
with kavanah. This is mesugal to save me from 'wrath and destruction.' I was saved before. 
Please save me again in this merit." 
  
A few moments later a German jeep drove by, filled with Nazis, and they saw this young 
lad trying to dig a ditch with a small shovel. To tease him, they threw tomatoes, potatoes, 
carrots, and other vegetables at him. Reb Shimon thought wryly, "I see that in the merit of 
birchas hamazon, I once again received the blessing for abundance. Now I need the blessings 
for protection from wrath and destruction as well."     Shortly afterwards a jeep with Russian 
POWs showed up. When they saw all the vegetables around Shimon, they stopped and 
asked for them. (They were hungry, because the Nazis hardly fed these prisoners.) 
 
With an authoritative voice, Shimon told the Russians, "When there is a pit two meters 
deep here, I will give you the vegetables." The Russians had the right tools for digging. They 
took them out of their jeep, and began digging the trench. There were several of them, so 
they were able to finish the job in a half-hour. The Nazi returned and saw that the task was 
completed. He said, "I always knew that G-d takes care of you. I just didn’t realize to what 
extent." Shimon was saved once again, in the merit of birchas hamazon. 
When he came to Eretz Yisrael after the war was over, he continued to enjoy many blessings 
of abundance. He always had parnassah, and he married off all of his children honorably, 
never going into debt – all in the merit of birchas hamazon.  
 
  
 
Mendel Beilis Trial 
 
 
New research into the Mendel Beilis trial of 1913, an infamous blood libel saga that unfolded 
in Kiev under the rule of Czar Nicholas II, throws light on fascinating little-known aspects 
of that drama. Beilis was a 39 year-old poor, obscure Russian Jew when he was thrust into 
history as the victim of an outrageous government frame-up. The body of a 13-year old 
boy, Andrei Yuschinsky, had been found in a cave with multiple stab wounds. Although 
no evidence existed to link Beilis to the crime, he was arrested in the middle of the night 
in June 1911 by the Czar's secret police and charged with ritually murdering the boy to 
obtain his blood for the baking of matzoh. 
 
Historians say the truth about the boy’s murder was already apparent to police long before 
Beilis went to trial. Records show that a female head of a criminal gang named Vera 
Cheberiak had masterminded the crime to prevent Andrei, who had stumbled on the gang’s 
stolen goods, from leaking this information to police. 
  
The Cheberiak gang plotted to make the killing look like a ritual murder, with the hope of 
instigating a pogrom and plundering Jewish homes under the cover of mob violence. True 
to plan, at Andrei’s funeral leaflets were distributed that blamed Jews for the lurid crime. 
“The Yids tortured Andrusha Yushchinsky to death!” the leaflets cried, urging the boy’s 
Russian countrymen to avenge him. 
   
Mendel Beilis spent over two years in prison in a filthy, freezing cell as the government 
took its time building a case against him. His plight – and the inflammatory fallout from 
the affair that threatened all the Jews of Russia – captured world attention, with Jews in 
every corner of the world anxiously following developments and praying for his acquittal. 
  
Jews were not alone in believing in Beilis’s innocence. Leading cultural, political and religious 
personalities rose to his defense. In England, the archbishops of Canterbury and York 
supported him. Workers in Warsaw and St. Petersburg rallied for Beilis, as did Russian 
writers and students. There were public protests in Berlin, London, Denver, New York and 
Chicago. 
  
Influential journalists in England and America attended the trial, assailing the sham 
proceedings. Their scathing reports helped sway public opinion in Beilis’s favor, although 
they exerted no impact on the Russian prosecutors determined to convict him. 
  
 
 
 
The Beilis trial was one of the first great “media circuses,” covered in Kiev by more than 
200 newspapers from around the world, along with a filming crew. Not all of the trial’s 
defining moments were grasped by observers. In one of those moments – most humiliating 
for the government – the prosecution’s expert witness on Judaism and the Talmud was 
unmasked as a faker. 
  
Called to testify as a scholar of Jewish practices and beliefs, a Catholic priest named Father 
Pranaitis sought to persuade the jury that the Talmud endorses ritual murder. The scheme 
collapsed however, as defense attorney Gruzenberg exposed the man as a fraud with a 
simple question. “Father Prenaitis, please tell the court, when did Baba Basra live and what 
was her activity?” 
  
Pranaitis was stumped. “I don’t know who she is,” he admitted. Laughter swept the 
courtroom where the Jews were seated. The priest had fallen into the trap, exposing his 
ignorance of one of the most well-known tractates of the Talmud. “Baba” in Russian means 
grandmother, and the government “expert” couldn’t place “Grandmother Basra.” 
  
Despite the collapse of the government’s case, the judge was relentless in his drive to find 
Beilis guilty. His final instructions to the jury showed how compromised he was. “This trial,” 
he said, “has touched upon a matter which concerns the existence of the whole Russian 
people. There are people who drink our blood.” 
   
To general astonishment, against all predictions, an all-Christian jury comprised mostly of 
peasants acquitted Beilis, sending shock waves throughout Russia. The jubilation in the 
courtroom defied description. 
  
Beilis became an instant celebrity. Besieged by unending limelight and exhausting attention, 
he left Russia with his family, settling in Eretz Yisroel, then called Palestine. Nine years later, 
with no means of livelihood, he relocated with his family to New York. There he wrote a 
memoir, The Story of My Sufferings, in which he chronicled some of the highlights of his 
traumatic experiences in Russia. 
  
In his book, he noted that the Russian government behaved with such ruthlessness, they 
retaliated even against their own officials. Detectives first assigned to the case, along with 
the chief of Kiev’s secret police, were dismissed from their posts and jailed for expressing 
their belief that Beilis must be innocent, because they could find no evidence against him. 
 
Beilis wrote with emotion about the many non-Jewish Russians who offered their support 
when it seemed he was doomed. He remembered that prison guards turned aside with tears 
in their eyes when his heartbroken wife and children visited him in prison. 
   
 
Far from discrediting the vicious canard that Jews kill Christians in order to use their blood 
in baking matzoh, the Beilis trial actually gave it new vitality, historians say. 
  
Shrewd prosecutors, seeking to counter the unthinkable possibility that the jurors might 
not return a guilty verdict, came up with an ingenious strategy through which they hoped 
the government could claim victory in any scenario. 
  
Their scheme, explains historian Edmund Levin in Murder and Conspiracy in Tsarist Russia: 
The Beilis Blood Libel, was to separate the charge of ritual murder from the question of the 
defendant’s guilt. 
  
The prosecutors did this by having the jury answer two questions: Did the crime of ritual 
murder as the government described it occur in the brick factory where Beilis worked as 
supervisor? Was Mendel Beilus guilty of murdering Andrei out of religious fanaticism? 
  
Most people, including Beilis’ own lead attorney, the legendary Oscar Gruzenberg, believed 
the jury would side with the government on both questions. But they were wrong. The jury 
voted yes on the first question – a ghastly ritual murder had indeed taken place – but 
found Beilis not guilty of the crime. The government thus claimed it had proved its case, 
that Jews practice ritual murder. 
  
Levin believes that the blood libel has clearly been a factor in the rise of modern anti
Semitism that culminated in Hitler’s war against the Jews and the atrocities of the Holocaust. 
  
In his book, the historian says that in the decades that followed the trial, “Mendel Beilis was 
consistently mentioned in anti-Semitic propaganda as example of Jewish ritual murder. The 
libel directly inspired the rampant metaphor of the Jews as economic ‘bloodsuckers.’” 
  
 
It demonized the Jews as a disloyal, cruel people eager to exploit their host country and 
suck dry its resources, a vicious stereotype the Nazis exploited to the hilt. 
 
Kiev’s chief rabbi, Moshe Asman, at an international conference commemorating the 100th 
anniversary of the Beilis trial said the Beilis affair was still relevant because Jews in Ukraine 
as well as in Israel were still being falsely accused of all kinds of crimes. “Now it’s anti
Semitic as well as anti-Israel. We have to present the public with the truth,” he said. 
  
Asman pointed to the recent calls to outlaw circumcision and Jewish ritual slaughter in 
Europe, anti-Semitic acts cloaked in humanitarian guises. 
  
 
Dr. Shimon Samuels of the Simon Wiesenthal Center in France, quoted in the Jerusalem 
Post, gave examples of blood libels since the Beilis case, and how they are also directed 
against Israel. 
  
“The State of Israel is the target of such blood libels. For example, the IDF medical team 
that set up the field hospital in Haiti after the [2010] earthquake, was accused by a Swedish 
newspaper of harvesting the body organs of Haitians. That type of thing is very pernicious 
and dangerous. It has to be exposed and acted against,” he urged.  
   
Some of the new research into the Beilus affair highlights the way it unified Jews of all 
streams in the face of hatred. 
  
Author Dovid Margolin writes that in April 1912, Kiev Chief Rabbi Shlomo Ahronson and 
prominent Jewish attorney Arnold Margolin met with noted Professor Vasily Chernov and 
the editorial staff of Kievlianin, an influential mouthpiece of the pro-Czarist, anti-Semitic 
intelligentsia. 
  
Ahronson, a representative of the mainstream Jewish community, was asked to disown 
the chassidim as a fanatical fringe sect, endorsing the allegation that they were guilty of 
ritual murder. He and his group refused to do so, stating, “Among us Jews there are no 
sects or parties … The chassidim are not sectarian at all, but a stream within Judaism; a very 
important stream indeed.” 
  
In a similar vein, the memoirs of Russia’s Chief Rabbi Mazeh provides a fascinating glimpse 
of a meeting between the Chortkover Rebbe and Rabbi Mazeh as the two discussed the 
Beilis case at length and agreed that unity was of paramount importance. 
  
They understood that the government’s strategy was to pit Jew against Jew by trying to 
paint Beilis as a member of a fanatical chassidic group and persuading the more mainstream 
Rabbi Mazeh, the defense’s key witness, to repudiate him. By throwing Beilus ‘under the 
bus,’ the majority of the Jewish community would be in the clear. 
  
 
The Chortkover Rebbe asked Rabbi Mazeh how he would respond to allegations in court 
about so-called immoral and criminal teachings of chassidus. “I want to point out that if, 
Heaven forbid, the rov won’t defend chassidus with full fervor, the prosecutors will try to 
make chassidim appear criminal. But remember,” the rebbe warned, “if they can succeed at 
that, they will end up targeting all Jews. Because they will ultimately claim that all Jews 
are chassidim.” 
  
 
Rabbi Mazeh fully understood. The conversation then turned to various defense strategies 
and the meaning of various Talmudic quotations. The two leaders even examined various 
publications by anti-Semites in order to anticipate the approach the prosecution would use 
and how to counter it. 
  
At the trial, Czarist prosecutors triumphantly played the “racist card” in an effort to 
demonize the Talmud for inciting Jew against non-Jew. 
“How dare the Jewish sages claim that [the Jewish people] are called adam, man, while 
[Gentiles] are not called adam?” they demanded, quoting the Talmud. 
  
Rav Meir Shapiro, head of the famous Yeshiva Chachmei Lublin, was appraised of this hostile 
and dangerous challenge at the Beilis trial. He wrote to Rabbi Mazeh advising him to explain 
Chazal’s statement as a simple description of the nature of the Jewish people as areivim zeh 
lazeh, responsible for each other (Shevuos 39). 
  
“According to this principle, the fate of Mendel Beilis touches the entire Jewish people,” 
Rav Shapiro said. “The Jewish people tremble for his welfare and would do everything in 
their power to remove the prisoner’s collar from him.” 
  
“How would the Gentile world react if one individual had been accused of a similar crime 
and was standing trial in a faraway country? No more than the people of his own town 
would show any interest in the libel. Perhaps, at most, people in other parts of his own 
country would criticize the proceedings. But people in other countries? They wouldn’t take 
the slightest personal interest in him.” 
  
“This is the difference between the Jews and all other peoples,” Rav Shapiro wrote. “The 
Jews are considered adam, the singular form of the word man, signifying solidarity and 
oneness. When one Mendel Beilis is put on trial, the entire Jewish world stands united at 
his side. With other peoples of the world, nothing like this can be expected. They may very 
well be considered anashim, but they cannot be considered adam, a nation that stands 
together as a single man.” 
 
Historians have not reached a consensus as to how it happened that an all-Christian jury of 
uneducated Russian peasants, many of whom were picked precisely because of anti-Semitic 
sentiments, at a trial where the presiding judge was in cahoots with the government, found 
Beilis innocent. To many it remains incomprehensible, a puzzle for the ages. 
  
It is probably fair to say, though, that for the spiritual giants of the generation who 
understood the vast power of weapons of the spirit, Beilis’ miraculous acquittal had a logic 
of its own.       [From Yated Neeman] 


םיקידצ ירופיס 
Captivating stories full of Yiras Shamayim taken from Shmuessin that 
Reb Kalman Krohn z’tl gave in Adelphia Yeshiva 
The Arizal’s Greatness 
During the times of the holy Arizal and Rav 
Shlomo Alkabetz, the Baal Lechah Dodi, there 
was a woman who suddenly developed a strange 
and unexplained illness. She took to her bed in 
terrible pain and seemed to be suffering from 
hallucinations. A thorough medical examination 
did nothing to explain her symptoms, and the 
subsequent opinions solicited from expert doctors 
brought no results. After sometime, her family 
began to suspect that a dibuk was living inside of 
her.  
A dibuk is the soul of a person who is no longer 
alive. Due to its actions during its lifetime, the 
dibuk is not permitted rest and is sent back down 
to the world, where it is pursued by destructive 
angels. For years and years on end, it roams from 
one side of the world to the other as it desperately 
attempts to dodge menacing angels wielding fiery 
clubs.  
The only time the dibuk finds peace from its 
pursuers is when it enters the body of a living 
being. It can find entry in a person who performs 
an aveirah, and once inside, wreaks havoc on its 
host’s body. Residing in the body finally affords 
the dibuk a measure of peace, and it is reluctant to 
leave. It takes a tzaddik knowledgeable in 
kabbalah to communicate with the dibuk and coax 
it out of the body in the least risky manner.  
There are various ways that a dibuk can leave a 
person’s body, and many of them are dangerous. 
If the dibuk leaves through the mouth, for 
instance, it takes the person’s soul along, 
effectively ending its host’s life. If it leaves 
through the elbow, the person will permanently 
lose the function of that arm and hand. The best 
place for the dibuk to leave is through the pinky 
toe, as that causes very little damage other than 
some bleeding.  
The woman’s family came to the Arizal to request 
his assistance in getting rid of the dibuk. Being 
that time was of essence and the Arizal would not 
have the time to personally assist them that day, 
he instructed his closest disciple, Rav Chaim 
Vital, to remove the dibuk in his stead.  
“Do it before sundown,” the Arizal instructed his 
student. “And I want you to be aware that the 
dibuk is a liar. In order to get it out of the woman’s 
body, you will need to know the name of the 
dibuk, as well as the name of its mother and 
father. It will try to lie to you, once, twice, and 
three times, but if you ask it its name a fourth 
time, it will no longer have the strength to lie.”  
Rav Chaim nodded and hurried to perform his 
rebbi’s bidding. It was already late in the 
afternoon, and there was not much time to waste. 
As he followed the woman’s relatives to her 
home, a curious crowd gathered behind him, 
eager to glimpse this unusual event.  
“Please, give her some privacy,” he pleaded with 
the crowd. “I don’t want anyone following me 
in.”  
1 
The people reluctantly hung back as Rav Chaim 
knocked on the door. “It’s Chaim Vital,” he 
called. “Can I come in?” 
Inside the house, the woman was sitting in a chair, 
her face constricted in pain. The room was 
crammed with people who had hurried ahead of 
Rav Chaim, hoping to witness the removal of the 
dibuk. When Rav Chaim’s voice sounded through 
the door, a deep voice suddenly emerged from the 
woman. Everyone leaned forward.  
“Ha ha,” the voice of the dibuk called out 
mockingly from within the woman. “Rav Chaim 
Vital is coming, and he thinks he can make me 
leave this woman’s body. I’ll never leave! Ha ha 
ha!” His evil laugh caused shivers to travel 
through the crowd.  
Someone opened the door and let Rav Chaim in. 
He was led to the room where the woman was 
sitting, and found her to be dressed very modestly, 
her kerchief covering most of her face.  
Suddenly, the same deep voice called out from 
inside of her. “The holiness on the face of Rav 
Chaim Vital is too much for me to look at.” 
Rav Chaim heard the fear in the dibuk’s voice and 
nodded. This was a positive development. “What 
is your name?” he asked the dibuk. 
“Yosef,” the diuk responded.  
“What is your name?” Rav Chaim asked again.  
“Moshe,” came the subsequent answer. 
“What is your name?” Rav Chaim questioned a 
third time. 
“Yehuda,” the dibuk responded.  
“I demand that you tell me your name,” Rav 
Chaim said sternly.  
“Yonasan,” the dibuk finally admitted truthfully, 
“I understand that you are in need of atonement,” 
Rav Chaim said to the dibuk. “However, you have 
no right to punish this woman simply because you 
require a tikkun. You must leave her body now!” 
“Absolutely not,” the dibuk responded. “I am 
staying right here.” 
Outside, the sun was setting, and the room grew 
dark. Lanterns were lit, casting dark shadows over 
Rav Chaim and the woman. “You must leave,” he 
insisted.  
“I’m not going anywhere,” the dibuk continued to 
maintain.  
“If you don’t leave this woman, I will put your 
soul through greater torture than you have ever 
known,” Rav Chaim informed the dibuk grimly.  
“You think that the angels are causing you pain? 
That’s nothing compared to what you’ll be feeling 
if you stay inside this woman. I know your name 
and can now excommunicate your soul. The 
consequences of this will be indescribably harsh.” 
“You can’t tell me what to do,” the dibuk said 
brazenly. “I’m not leaving, and that’s that.” 
Rav Chaim tried in various ways, but the dibuk 
refused to cooperate. Soon, the dibuk stopped 
responding, ignoring him completely. “I’m going 
to daven maariv and then I’ll consult with the 
Arizal,” he informed the woman’s family.  
After maariv, Rav Chaim approached his rebbi 
and described the situation.  
The Arizal nodded thoughtfully. “I knew it would 
be difficult, and that is why I specifically 
instructed that the dibuk be removed before 
shkiah. Once nighttime falls, the level of impure 
forces increases tremendously, making it a lot 
more difficult, impossible even, to get the dibuk’s 
cooperation. You’ll have to try again in the 
morning.” 
2 
supplying the names of his parents as well. 
Rav Chaim looked glum, picturing the woman’s 
pained face. “But she’s suffering so badly. How 
can she wait until morning?” 
“There’s no other choice, unfortunately,” the 
Arizal responded. “The dibuk will not leave her 
body at night. Go back tomorrow, first thing in the 
morning, and you should be able to get the dibuk 
out.” 
His heart heavy, Rav Chaim went to inform the 
family of the Arizal’s instructions. He spent the 
night weighed down with deep remorse for not 
having been able to coax the dibuk out of the 
woman before nightfall, feeling a heavy 
responsibility for her extra hours of suffering.  
When morning finally approached, he davened 
vasikin and gathered a minyan of men. Together, 
they hurried back to the woman’s home.  
“I know your name,” Rav Chaim reminded the 
dibuk. “You must obey me and leave this 
woman’s body.” 
“I won’t, I can’t,” the dibuk moaned in response. 
“I’ll help you achieve atonement if you leave her 
body,” Rav Chaim offered.  
“No,” the dibuk said stubbornly. 
“I’m asking you one more time to leave on your 
own,” Rav Chaim continued. “After that, I will 
invoke kabbalah and force you to leave.” 
“No,” the dibuk continued to insist. 
Rav Chaim began to say specific pesukim and 
sheimos. “I command you to leave through the 
pinkie of this woman,” he ordered. 
Suddenly, the woman began crying out in pain. 
“Something’s… 
moving!” 
“Through…my…hand. Ow!”  
she 
gasped. 
Suddenly, a long plume of fire began shooting out 
dibuk’s deep voice began screaming from within 
the pinkie, “Help me! Please, Rav Chaim, you are 
the only one who can help me! I am leaving her, 
but you must help me!” 
“Tell me, what was your sin?” Rav Chaim asked 
the flaming pinkie. “What did you do that caused 
you this eternal suffering?” 
“I was a malshin, an informer,” the dibuk 
admitted. 
“Who did you inform on?” Rav Chaim queried.  
The dibuk began to cry. “I was an informer my 
entire life, informing on my fellow Jews to the 
government for money. People used to yell at me, 
avoid me, slander me, but I was profiting too 
much to care. So many Jews lost their parnasah 
and their freedom because of me.” 
“That is a terrible sin,” Rav Chaim agreed. “I 
understand that you need a tremendous tikun. 
However, why did you go into this specific 
woman? What did she do wrong?” 
“Ha, you think she’s so innocent?” the dibuk 
scoffed. “She does terrible aveiros.” 
Rav Chaim looked at the woman, so modestly 
dressed. It was difficult to imagine that she had 
committed grave sins. “What does she do?” 
“This woman has a maid, a non-Jewish maid, who 
likes to sing,” the dibuk explained. “The songs 
that she sings are vulgar and coarse, and they 
impact this woman when she hears them. While 
she would never sing such impure songs herself, 
just listening to them has contaminated her soul, 
allowing me to enter her body.” 
“I promise you that she will never listen to those 
impure songs again,” Rav Chaim pledged. “She’ll 
fire the maid immediately and be careful with the 
kind of music she listens to. Now, please leave her 
3 
of the woman’s pinkie, like a lit match. The 
body.” 
“I won’t leave until you promise me a tikun,” the 
dibuk countered.  
“I will give you a tikun,” Rav Chaim agreed. 
“Leave this woman completely.” 
The woman began moaning in pain as the pencil 
of fire shot out from her pinkie. A moment later, 
the window shattered. Then the woman opened 
her eyes and smiled. For the first time in months, 
she felt no pain.  
“You must fire that maid immediately,” Rav 
Chaim instructed her. “And you must make sure 
never to listen to non-Jewish music again.  If, chas 
v’shalom, you succumb and listen to such music, 
you will be vulnerable to another dibuk entering 
your body.” 
“Yes, I’ll fire her at once, and I won’t ever listen 
to 
such music again,” the woman sobbed 
emotionally. “Thank you! Thank you for saving 
my life!” 
Rav Chaim left her home and returned to his 
mentor, the Arizal, who instructed him on which 
tikunim to do for the soul of the informer.  
News of the story spread, and people discussed 
the holiness of Rav Chaim Vital and his rebbi, the 
Arizal, with tremendous awe. As the story was 
shared from one household to the next, another 
story emerged, this time featuring the Arizal 
himself. 
One day, the Arizal was sitting at a table in his 
front yard, learning from a sefer before him. 
Suddenly, a goat wandered into the yard, walked 
up to him, and put its paws down onto the table.  
The people who were present watched in 
amazement as the Arizal began to speak to the 
goat in a low voice. The goat began to cry pitifully 
as the Arizal continued speaking. Then, the Arizal 
made a motion with his finger and the goat 
obediently took its paws off the table and made its 
way to the shochet, settling down politely in front 
of him, inviting the man to slaughter it.  
When questioned about this bizarre occurrence, 
the Arizal explained that the goat was a gilgul of 
a man who had done terrible aveiros in the past. It 
was a human soul cloaked in an animal’s body, 
and this caused it immense pain. When it felt it 
could no longer handle the agony of living in the 
body of an animal, the goat made its way to the 
Arizal for assistance in achieving atonement. 
The Arizal told the goat that it would merit 
atonement if it were to be slaughtered and its meat 
given to a talmid chacham. After the talmid 
chacham would recite a brachah over its meat, it 
would achieve atonement. Desperate to atone for 
its sins as soon as possible, the goat hurried 
immediately to be slaughtered.  
An abundance of stories such as these began 
spreading about the Arizal and his disciple, Rav 
Chaim Vital, and the stories made their way 
overseas. Eventually, they reached the ears of a 
wealthy man, Yehoshua, who resided in the city 
of Kushta.  
Yehoshua was meeting a friend in a quiet tavern 
when the conversation turned to the amazing 
stories depicting the Arizal’s greatness and his 
kabbalistic abilities, and he remained skeptical. 
“How can a human today be able to read minds?” 
he chuckled.  
“No, he really can,” his friends insisted. “The 
Arizal’s greatness is unsurpassed. He understands 
the language of the trees and can read the past and 
future in the stars. He can take one look at 
someone and know everything about him, all his 
actions and deeds.” 
Yehoshua began laughing harder. “Oh, please, 
don’t tell me you believe this nonsense. These are 
just unfounded rumors. I bet you he can’t do 
anything like this.” 
“Be careful how you speak,” his friend cautioned.  
4 
“How may I help you?” the Arizal asked his 
“Don’t speak like that against someone as great as 
the Arizal.” 
Yehoshua just continued laughing. Flagging 
down a waiter, he ordered a full glass of strong 
wine. When it arrived, he lifted it. “A toast to the 
success of the Arizal!” he cried mockingly, 
draining the cup. 
His friend rose in protest. “How can you do such 
a thing?!” he demanded, scandalized by the 
wealthy man’s behavior. “It’s bad enough that 
you’re drinking this non-kosher wine. How can 
you use this yayin nesech to degrade the holy 
Arizal?!” 
“Don’t tell me what to do,” Yehoshua roared, the 
effects of the alcohol already evident in his tone.  
Far away, in Tzefas, the Arizal was sitting and 
learning, surrounded by his talmidim, when he 
suddenly began laughing.  
“Why is rebbi laughing?” someone asked.  
“There is someone in Kushta who just toasted my 
success on a cup of yayin nesech,” the Arizal 
explained. “In ten days, he will be here in this 
room. You will all be present, and you’ll see the 
way he will try to test me. And then you will see 
how I will give him the tikun he requires.” 
One day passed, then two. Word got out that on a 
secific day, someone would be coming to a pick a 
fight with the Arizal. The people waited eagerly 
to see how the story would play out. 
Five days passed, then six and seven. Sure 
enough, on the tenth day, Yehoshua showed up.  
He had traveled all the way from Kushta to 
disprove the greatness of the Arizal. A small 
crowd had gathered to await his arrival, and they 
shivered when he knocked on the door, right on 
schedule. The showdown had begun. 
guest.  
“I was told that you know everything about 
everyone,” Yehoshua said brazenly. “So, tell me, 
what did I do yesterday?” 
The Arizal gave a small chuckle. “Yesterday?”  
He began listing, in accurate detail, everything 
Yehoshua had done from the morning until the 
night. Yehoshua listened, stunned, having been 
completely unprepared that the Arizal would 
succeed in besting him. 
“Not only what you did yesterday,” the Arizal 
continued when he finished recounting the 
previous day’s events. “I can tell you what 
happened before yesterday. You robbed your 
partner Mordechai of his rightful share of the 
business. You drank yayin nesech. You caused an 
almanah suffering. You performed the three 
gravest sins in the Torah: avodah zara, giluy 
arayos, and shefichas damim as well!” 
“What are you talking about?” Yehoshua tried to 
deny the accusations, his face flaming in 
embarrassment.  
“You surely remember the terrible aveirah that 
you did with your maid,” the Arizal reminded 
him. “And then afterward, you informed on her 
and had her killed.” 
“Absolutely not!” Yehoshua cried in denial. “I’ll 
admit that I am guilty of the other sins you 
mentioned, but this last story is slander. If you say 
I did it, prove it.” He smiled smugly, sure that he 
had bested the Arizal. After all, the maid was no 
longer alive and therefore unavailable to testify. 
“You want to test me?” the Arizal asked in a low, 
dangerous tone. “I can bring the maid here right 
now.” 
5 
When Yehoshua heard this, he threw himself to 
Yehoshua rolled his eyes. “Impossible. She’s 
dead. There’s no way you can prove any of this… 
of this malicious slander.” 
“Don’t test me,” the Arizal warned.  
“What are you, a magician?” Yehoshua scoffed.  
“If you can bring her back to life, go ahead! Show 
me how!” 
The Arizal closed his eyes and began 
concentrating on kabbalistic phrases. Suddenly, 
the body of the maid descended into the room, 
right before their eyes. Yehoshua shrank back in 
fear, but then relaxed when he saw that the maid’s 
body was lifeless.  
The Arizal walked over to Yehoshua and 
stretched out his hand. In one fluid motion, he 
pulled the maid’s soul out from within Yehoshua 
and thrust it into her dead body. And just like that, 
the maid was living and breathing again.  
“He sinned with me,” the maid testified. “And 
then he informed on me to the local government 
and had me killed.” 
As soon as she finished her testimony, the Arizal 
withdrew the soul from inside her and replaced it 
within Yehoshua. Immediately, her body fell 
lifelessly to the floor. The Arizal pronounced a 
specific name of Hashem, and the body 
disappeared.  
“How… what…” Yehoshua sputtered.  
“I’ll explain,” the Arizal said gently. “When a 
person does the terrible sin of giluy arayos, the 
soul of the woman is bound to his like a dog, and 
he can never shake it off. When his neshamah 
ascends to shomayim after his lifetime, he will be 
unable to deny the sin, as the woman’s soul is 
bound to him forever.  Although you don’t feel 
her soul within you, it is tied to you and will 
the floor. “Rebbi, please, give me a tikun,” he 
pleaded. “I need atonement. How can I get it?” 
The Arizal looked sternly at the man at his feet. 
“What do you think this is, a game? You do 
terrible aveiros, you mock me with forbidden 
wine, you brazenly try to test me. And now that I 
proved that I am right, you suddenly come crying 
for a tikun? It’s not that easy!” 
Yehoshua began weeping profusely. Crouched on 
the floor in a puddle of tears, he begged and 
pleaded for atonement.  
“I don’t see how I can give you a tikun,” the 
Arizal told him. “You don’t appear to have real 
regret for your sins.”  
In response, Yehoshua reached into his pocket 
and removed a heavy bag of coins. Putting the 
money on the table, he said, “Rebbi, I want your 
talmidim to use this money to purchase wood, and 
then to burn me to death. That will be my 
kaparah.” 
The Arizal looked silently at the money for a 
moment. “That’s not the way we do it in bais din,” 
he finally said. “The way sereifah is done is that 
we will dig a pit deep enough that when you stand 
in it, the ground will reach your waist. Then we’ll 
pour hot lead down your throat, from which you 
will die. That will be your tikun.” 
“I never realized how grave my sins were,” 
Yehoshua said in a trembling voice, “But if that is 
what I need to achieve atonement, then I am 
ready.”  
The Arizal gave one of his students some money 
to purchase a piece of lead and instructed a few 
others to dig a hole in the middle of the floor. 
When the student returned with the lead, it was 
cooked up in a small pot and melted into a boiling, 
sticky mass.  
6 
remain that way forever.” 
Yehoshua went to stand inside the pit, tears of 
regret streaming down his cheeks. The Arizal 
grasped him by both shoulders and gave him a 
shake. “You must say shema,” he instructed. 
“And now vidui. And I will give you certain 
sheimos to think about as we pour the boiling lead 
down your throat. It won’t be an easy death, but 
in this manner, you should merit atonement.” 
Between 
gut-wrenching 
sobs, 
Yehoshua 
whispered a heartfelt vidui, repenting on the 
terrible sins he had committed in his lifetime. The 
Arizal watched him thoughtfully, not uttering a 
word.  
When Yehoshua finished reciting vidui, he 
looked up from his tears, waiting for the torturous 
death, but the Arizal was still just gazing at him. 
He waited tensely for a minute, then two, and then 
he could no longer handle the wait. “Rebbi, please 
give me the kaparah,” he begged. “Please give it 
quickly. The wait is so difficult.” 
The Arizal nodded. “Close your eyes and recite 
the brachah of shehakol. We will pouring warm 
lead down your throat, and although it will burn 
you and eventually choke you to death, you must 
recite a brachah on the moment of pleasure when 
the warm liquid begins sliding down your throat.” 
Yehoshua obediently closed his eyes, his entire 
body trembling. “Baruch atah Hashem Elokeinu 
melech haolam,” he recited fervently. “Shehakol 
nihiyeh bidvaro.” 
“And now, with your eyes closed, open your 
mouth,” the Arizal continued. Yehoshua opened 
his mouth, but instead of pouring the molten lead 
inside, the Arizal reached for a small jar of honey, 
which he began spooning into the condemned 
man’s mouth.  
It took a minute for Yehoshua to understand what 
was happening. At first, he thought he was 
hallucinating when the cool, sweet, and thick 
liquid entered his mouth. When he grasped that it 
was truly honey, not lead, he opened his eyes in 
confusion. 
The Arizal grasped his arm and helped him out of 
the pit. Instructing his students to leave the room, 
he led the ashen-faced man to a chair. “Hashem 
loves the yidden,” he explained. “He does not 
want to hurt us. However, there are times when a 
person’s sins require him to go through terrible 
suffering in order to achieve atonement.  
“You, too, were destined for a torturous death. 
However, you repented, and Hashem has 
accepted your teshuvah. Those moments where 
death was staring you in the eye were so real to 
you that you experienced the actual fear of death, 
and that has served as your complete kaparah.” 
Have a Wonderful Shabbos! 
This story is taken from tape # A429 
Yecheskel Schwab Lakewood  
Yecheskel Schwab  
Chatz  Schwab Lakewood 
Toras Reb Kalman 
Lakewood New Jersey 
609.807.1783 
torasrebkalman@gmail.com 
Yecheskel Schwab Lakewood 
Sponsored by: 
Eli & Malky Friedman 
Chatz & Leahle Schwab   
Chatz Schwab Lakewood  
7 


A Collection of Stories told over by the dedicated 
Second Grade Rebbeim of 
Yeshiva Darchei Torah  
Rabbi Chaim Ozer Bender 
Rabbi Nachum Dinowitz 
Rabbi Moshe Waxman 
Rabbi Nachum Nachumson  
Rabbi Yonason Posnick 
Rabbi Eliezer Selengut 
Rabbi Eliyahu Saldinger 
Rabbi Yaakov Zukerman 
Collected, transcribed, and compiled 
By Rabbi Nachum Dinowitz 
Edited for publication 
By Mrs Rachel Farkas 
Dedication
This book is dedicated to  
Rebbetzin Strickman 
Rebbetzin Strickman was a person who lived a life of 
Shabbos every day of the week. Her love and warmth 
imbued everything she did and everyone she came into 
contact with, children and adults alike, with a sense of 
focus and importance, which uplifted each and every 
person. 
May her Shabbos aura be an inspiration to us all. 


Introduction 
Many years ago, there was a simple chassid who knew very little Torah. He 
could barely learn and was not known as a particularly deep thinker, but on Shabbos, 
he would daven for hours upon hours.  
One day, some of the other chassidim could no longer contain their curiosity and 
approached him and asked, “Excuse us. We mean no disrespect. All week long you 
work hard and barely sit to learn a few mishnayous between mincha and maariv. Yet 
on Shabbos, you daven for such a long time with and such intense kavana. We are 
curious. What are you thinking about so deeply that makes your davening so long?”  
The chassid answered, “Well, every Friday night we say (in Lecha Dodi) 
דָׁחֶא רוּב ִדְב רֹוכָׁז ְו רֹומָׁש – That means we need to have “Shomer” and “Zochor” in 
mind with each Dibor Echad – with each word we say on Shabbos and that’s why 
my davening takes so long.” 
Often we discuss the רֹומָׁש – the aspect of guarding Shabbos, with 
all its intricate halachos. This collection is an attempt to include more 
רֹוכָׁז - remembering the kedusha and simcha of Shabbos,  ְ
דָׁחֶא רוּב ִד – 
ב
each time we talk about Shabbos with our families.  
Each week, the boys of the Second Grade gather together to 
experience a small taste of Shabbos by singing songs and hearing stories 
of the kedusha and power of Shabbos. It is in this vein that we present 
the following stories with the hope that they will enhance your 
discussions of רֹומָׁש and רֹוכָׁז ְו - דָׁחֶא רוּב ִדְב – each time you discuss 
Shabbos for years to come. 
Rebbi - 
Table of Contents: 
Erev Shabbos 
1. An Erev Shabbos Test 
2. Yosef Mokir Shabbos 
3. Eternal Reward for Honoring Shabbos 
4. The Slow Carriage 
5. Being a True Shomer Shabbos 
6. A Tale of Two Rings 
7. From Rags to Riches 
8. Shabbos in Mexico 
9. A Candy for Shabbos 
10. Watering the Plants 
11. Kabbalas Shabbos - A Source of Merit 
12. “Sha...boss!” 
13. Splurg ing on Shabbos Wine 
Shabbos is a Gutte Zach  
(Shabbos Saves the Day) 
1. Shabbos Protection 
2. Sir Moshe Montefiore and the Czar 
3. The Business of Keeping Shabbos 
4. Shabbos in the Herman Home 
5. Onions L'Kavod Shabbos 
6. Straus Bank is Closed on Shabbos! 
7. The Miller who was Mechalel Shabbos 
8. Don't Forget Who You Are! 
9. Shabbos in Pajamas 
10. He Never Sleeps on Shabbos 
11. Reb Mattisyahu and the Wheat 
12. Saved by the Queen 
13. From Kiddush To Havdalah 
14. No Weekday Talk  
15. Reach for the Gold 
16. The Lost Sister 
17. The Best Medicine 
18. Reb Ariel and the Lion 
The Value of Keeping Shabbos 
1. The Golden Coin 
2. Yosef the Spy 
3. The Aroma of Shabbos 
4. The Chafetz Chaim's 'Shabbos!' 
5. The Write Thing to Do 
6. The Cow that Kept Shabbos 
7. The Carpet Test 
8. Army Talk and Walk 
9. By the Port 
10. The Embarrassed Challah 
11. The Shalom Bayis Kugel 
12. Consideration for the Cook 
13. The Black Carriage 
14. The Gauntlet 
15. Shabbos on Thursday 
16. Splurging on Shabbos Wine 
17. The Most Beautiful Sukkah 
18. Shabbos is Mekor Habrocha 
19. Shabbos in a Bowling Alley 
20. Shabsai’s Shabbos Gift 
21. The Blank Check 
22. Lighting Up 
23. Shabbos, Heilige Shabbos! 
24. The Miracle of the Vinegar 
25. Reconstruction and Deconstruction 
26. Good to the Last Salty Drop 
27. The Tchebiner Rov Doesn't Sleep on 
Shabbos
1 | P a g e 
Erev Shabbos 
An Erev Shabbos Test 
A young Jewish man from Mexico recently took a written exam given at the top 
engineering firm in the country to decide the eligibility of their candidates for a position 
in the company. The test was administered on a Friday afternoon in May. It was scheduled 
to take place at 4pm, but due to technical problems it did not start until 5:30pm. Shabbos 
began at 7:15pm, and the young man calculated that he would need to leave by 6:15 to get 
home in time to prepare for Shabbos. 
The test consisted of five essay questions. 
By 6:15, he had managed to complete only two of 
them. Rather than compromise his Shabbos 
observance, he handed in the paper - obviously 
well before anyone else did - and left. He was 
about to pull out of the parking lot when he 
discovered that he had forgotten his driver’s 
license in the exam room. He quickly returned, 
and was stunned to see the CEO of the company 
pacing outside the room. The CEO was holding 
his exam paper. 
“Is this your test?” the CEO inquired. 
The young man answered that it was. 
“I am rarely here this time on Friday,” the CEO explained, “but while I was walking 
through the hallway, I noticed that someone completed the exam very early. I couldn't 
believe anyone finished the test so quickly, so I figured maybe this person is a genius, and 
I wanted to see his paper. I looked and saw that the first two questions were answered 
perfectly, but the rest was left blank. What's going on?” 
The young man explained that the test began much later than scheduled, and he did 
not have time to complete the exam because he had to be home in time for the Jewish 
Sabbath. 
The CEO was very impressed. “Wow,” he marveled, “that is remarkable 
commitment. You were willing to give up a job opportunity for your Sabbath.” Right then 
1 | P a g e 
and there, he offered the young man a job. The company continued to be very 
understanding about his need to take off on Shabbos and the Yomim Tovim.  
o
Yosef Mokir Shabbos 
On the edge of the sea, in a small house lived a tzaddik named Yosef. Yosef was 
very poor but was satisfied each day with just a little bread with salt and some small 
vegetables. However, on Erev Shabbos, Yosef made a point of buying the best fish and 
tastiest meat, and all sorts of delicacies and treats L'Kavod Shabbos. On Shabbos day, 
Yosef's face was glowing with happiness because of the special Shabbos foods that he was 
able to buy L'Kavod Shabbos. All the merchants in the town who knew of Yosef's special 
minhag would call him 'Yosef Mokir Shabbos' - Yosef who honors the Shabbos. 
Not far from the house of Yosef stood a beautiful palace. In the palace lived a 
terrible non-Jew who was very rich and who owned a lot of property. Yosef worked in the 
fields of this rich man. The rich man made Yosef work very hard, but paid him very little. 
One day, a stargazer came to visit the city and told the rich man, "All of your riches 
come from Yosef Mokir Shabbos, and to Yosef those riches shall return!" When the rich 
man heard this, he became very sad and worried. He said to himself, "How will I save my 
riches? How will I keep them from the hand of this Jew?" So, he called his advisers and 
asked them what to do. They said, “You should sell all of your possessions and buy a 
beautiful expensive pearl. It will be easy to guard your expensive pearl so Yosef won't be 
able to take it.” 
That is what the rich man did. He sold his palace and all his possessions and bought 
a huge expensive beautiful pearl for 60,000 dinarim. Then he sewed the precious pearl into 
his hat and he said ‘Now I can guard my riches and they will not go back to the Jew, 
Yosef.’ The rich man was very happy with his idea. 
One day, the rich man decided to go out for a walk. As he was walking along the 
river, he came to a long bridge. He continued his stroll across the bridge, when suddenly, 
while he was in the middle of the bridge, there was a strong gust of wind that blew his hat 
off his head and into the river. The rich man stood by helplessly as a big fish swam by and 
2 | P a g e 
swallowed the pearl that came loose from his hat. 
That Friday morning, the fishermen 
went down to the river to catch fish to sell in 
the market. Wouldn't you know it, one of the 
fishermen caught a giant fish!! When he 
returned to market to sell the fish, no one 
wanted to buy such an enormous fish, even 
though it was a beautiful fish. Everyone told 
the fisherman that the only person who would 
buy such a beautiful fish was Yosef Mokir 
Shabbos. "He will certainly want to honor 
Shabbos with such a beautiful fish!" When 
Yosef saw the fish, he was truly impressed. "I have never seen such a fish," he said. "I 
must have it to honor the Shabbos properly!" Even after he heard the very high price, he 
did not hesitate and bought the fish. 
When he returned home and started cleaning the fish, he was amazed to find the 
huge pearl inside of it.  After Shabbos, Yosef sold it for thirteen roomfuls of gold dinarim. 
Yosef became very, very rich. 
People all around started to say that any expenses that a person spends to honor 
Shabbos, Shabbos will return to him and he will be paid back.  
o
Eternal Reward for Honoring Shabbos 
Reb Isser’l, was a successful textile merchant. Over time, he gained a sterling 
reputation for selling the finest fabrics. As busy as he would be, he was steadfast to his 
commitment to close his store on Friday at noon. No matter what, at chatzos, everything 
stopped in honor of Shabbos.  
His commitment came to a trying test, when one Friday, a wealthy nobleman 
entered his store, inspecting the quality of his most superior cloth. He requested large 
quantities of the finest fabrics to be put to one side. The order, when completed, would 
3 | P a g e 
bring Reb Isser’l much wealth; a windfall had come his way. Such customers do not come 
by every day! The measurements were being taken, while the clock continued to tick.  
When it reached chatzos...  
“I am sorry sir, but I must stop now, my store is closing; please come back Sunday 
morning, when we can continue business,” Reb Isser'l informed his distinguished 
customer. 
“Isser’l, I must have the cloth today, it will only take 15 minutes or so, and then I 
will be gone,” said the merchant.  
Reb Isser’l explained that although he wanted to be of service, business always 
ceased at midday on Friday. The transaction could not be completed now. Sunday was the 
only option. The merchant made it clear that it was either ‘now or never.’ He would take 
his business elsewhere. It was the business deal of a lifetime, and throwing away such an 
opportunity would seem ridiculous to most.  
Reb Isser’l would not be swayed. He viewed it differently; for him, this was an 
opportunity to show his true love and dedication for Shabbos. With that, he proudly closed 
his store, and the merchant stormed off.    
In Heaven, nothing goes unnoticed. It was decided that material riches would not 
suffice as his reward, it would need to be something eternal. Reb Isser’l was granted a child 
whom he named Moshe. Moshe grew up to become the famous Rama who continues to 
light up the world with his Torah. 
o
The Slow Carriage  
Once, the two tzaddikim, R' Yaakov Yosef of Polonye, known as the Toldos 
Yaakov Yosef, and Reb Nachman of Horodenka, were travelling to Mezhibuzh to spend 
Shabbos with their Rebbe, the Ba'al Shem Tov. It was Friday, and they set out from the 
city of Polnoye with their horse and wagon with plenty of time to arrive in Mezhibuzh by 
midday on Erev Shabbos. 
They hadn't even travelled half the distance, when they saw ahead of them a broad 
regal carriage, trimmed with gold and ivory, being drawn by four white horses. Obviously, 
4 | P a g e 
it was the carriage of a wealthy and important individual. It was making its way along the 
road at a leisurely pace, as if Shabbos wasn't to be expected later in the day. Passing in 
front of the carriage was impossible at this time of year due to the mountainous snowdrifts 
piled high along the both sides of the road. They had no choice but to slow down and 
follow along behind. 
The "Toldos" became very upset and began to worry about the situation, predicting 
that they would not make it to Mezhibuzh 
before Shabbos and worrying that they may 
even wind up traveling on Shabbos if they 
wanted to spend Shabbos in Mezhibuzh. Reb 
Nachman however, kept calm, reminding his 
friend that everything would be okay, that all 
that Hashem does is for the best. Moreover, as 
students of the Baal Shem Tov, they had learned 
that Hashem guides everything that occurs in 
the world, and therefore their situation was 
certainly Hashem's hand at work. 
Less than an hour passed before they had to come to a complete halt. Spread out 
on the road ahead as far as the eye could see was a company of Russian soldiers, and they 
were marching at a pace that confirmed that their job this morning was to compact the 
mud of the road with their feet. 
Now, the "Toldos" became doubly agitated, not knowing whom to lash out against 
first. But Reb Nachman assured him that everything in Hashem's plan is for the ultimate 
good. 
The commander of the company, seeing the regal looking coach coming his way, 
obviously recognized that a personage of some importance was inside and gave orders for 
the entire company to thin out and make passage for the dignitary and his "entourage." In 
moments, the two tzaddikim, following close behind the carriage of the dignitary, passed 
beyond the sea of soldiers, continuing on the road to Mezhibuzh, only this time, they were 
travelling on the newly flattened road, thanks to the soldiers. 
Not more than a few more minutes passed until they came to a fork in the road. 
The dignitary in his coach went one direction, the Toldos and Reb Nachman the other. 
Regaining speed, they arrived in Mezhibuzh with plenty of time to prepare for Shabbos. 
5 | P a g e 
Being a True Shomer Shabbos 
Leibish and Baila were married for many years, but were not yet blessed with 
children. They davened day in and day out and traveled to many tzaddikim to receive their 
brachos in the hopes that they merit having a child, yet they remained childless. 
Their 15th anniversary came and went and their pain became stronger and more 
intense; they could no longer bear the loneliness and heartache. Was their destiny to be 
one of infinite childlessness? 
They decided that they must undertake the long and difficult journey and visit the 
famous tzaddik, the Chofetz Chaim. Perhaps a tzaddik of his caliber could offer them a 
last glimmer of hope. 
The journey took them a few weeks, but they finally made it to the tiny shtetl of 
Radin. It seemed so ironic that such a small, insignificant village which was hard to find 
on a map could be the home of arguably the greatest tzaddik of his generation, and perhaps 
his era. 
They knocked on the door of the humble home and were ushered into the 
unfurnished “study” of the tzaddik. They poured out their hearts to the sage and begged 
him to help them in any way that he could and ensure that they wouldn’t live out their 
days in childless loneliness. 
The Chofetz Chaim opened a Chumash to Parshas Vayeishev to the portion that 
relates the story of Yosef telling over his dreams to his brothers, and turned to the woman 
and asked, “What time do you light the Shabbos candles each Erev Shabbos?” 
Startled by the question, Baila stumbled a reply, “Why, eighteen minutes before 
sunset, as is the minhag of most Jewish women.” 
The Chofetz Chaim read from the Chumash, (Perek 37:11), “…V’Aviv Shomar Es 
HaDavar - and his father “watched” what he said.” 
What does “Shomar” mean?” he asked. “Rashi explains that the word “Shomar” in 
this context doesn’t mean “watched,” rather it means “waited and anticipated for the 
arrival of…”. 
“You are, of course, Shomrei Shabbos,” said the Chofetz Chaim, “but do you 
anticipate and wait for Shabbos to arrive? Or, do you finish your preparations in the nick 
of time right before Shabbos arrives? Shabbos is deserving of us waiting for it! The 
Shabbos queen is deserving of our full attention when she arrives!” 
The Chofetz Chaim then turned to them and said, “In the Aseres Hadibros it says, 
“Shamor Es Yom HaShabbos L’Kadsho- watch the Shabbos day and make it holy…” 
6 | P a g e 
which is followed (in 5:14) by, “Atah U’Vincha U’Vitecha - you, your son and your 
daughter….” 
“One who is “Shomer” Shabbos, with the definition of the Rashi above, merits 
having children! Be mekabel (accept) Shabbos early, don’t rush into Shabbos! Wait for 
Shabbos! Anticipate Shabbos! In this merit, may 
Hashem bless you with “Vincha U’Vitecha
children.” 
Armed with their newfound mission of 
becoming “real” Shomrei Shabbos and with the 
brachah of the holy Chofetz Chaim, Leibish and 
Baila returned home with lighter hearts than 
when they arrived. 
The following Erev Shabbos everything 
was ready a full hour before sunset, and from 
that week onward the candles were always lit a 
full half hour before the “regular” time of Licht 
Bentching (candle lighting). 
What a beautiful glow those candles 
brought into the home. What Kavod Shabbos! 
One year later… 
Mazel Tov! The formerly barren home was glowing with the light of a radiant Jewish 
child. Leibish sat at the Shabbos table while holding his son in his arms and gazing at the 
Shabbos candles. He sang those precious words “HaShomer Shabbos….HaBen Im 
HaBas…One who anticipates the arrival of Shabbos Kodesh… [Will merit] sons and 
daughters." 
A Tale of Two Rings 
o
Many years ago, in faraway Russia, there lived a poor Yid named Mordechai. 
Mordechai was so poor that he could barely afford to buy food for his family. Although it 
7 | P a g e 
was so hard for Mordechai to buy food all week long, he always tried his best to buy 
something special L'Kavod Shabbos Kodesh, something to honor the holy Shabbos. He 
wanted to show Hashem how much he loved Shabbos, and he did this by buying special 
foods for this holy day. 
What did Mordechai do? Every day he would put aside some of the money he 
earned. He was very careful not to spend this money all week. On Monday, he might put 
aside a dime, on Tuesday, an entire dollar, on Wednesday, another dollar, on Thursday, a 
quarter, and on Friday, five dollars. Mordechai did this each week, putting aside and saving 
up to buy special food for Shabbos - L'Kavod Shabbos Kodesh. 
One week, however, Mordechai did not find much work. Since he did so little work, 
he earned so little money that he was not able to put any money aside to buy special food 
for Shabbos. This made him very sad because he really wanted to show Hashem how 
much he loved Shabbos, by buying something special for that heilige day. 
Mordechai's wife saw that Mordechai was very sad.  
She said to him, “Don't worry. We will be able to buy special foods for Shabbos. 
Borrow money from the non-Jewish moneylender to buy food for Shabbos. Hashem will 
return the money to us.” 
“But I don't think the money lender will be willing to lend us money,” said 
Mordechai. “He knows that I am very poor and he will think that I am so poor that I will 
never be able to repay the money. I am sure that he will not want to lend me any money.” 
Mordechai’s wife had a beautiful gold ring that her grandmother had given her 
when she was a kallah. “Take my gold ring,” she said, “and give it to the moneylender. 
That way, if you won’t be able to return the money, he can keep the gold ring instead. I 
am sure that if you give him this lovely ring, he will lend you the money, and we will be 
able to buy special food L'Kavod Shabbos Kodesh.” 
Mordechai brought his wife's beautiful gold ring to the moneylender. The 
moneylender took the ring and lent Mordechai $500! “If you do not return the $500 within 
30 days,” the moneylender said, “I will sell the ring and keep the money. But, if you return 
the money before 30 days, I will give you back your wife's beautiful gold ring.” 
Mordechai was very, very happy, because now he could buy food and wine for 
Shabbos. He was so happy that he could show Hashem how much he loved Shabbos by 
honoring it with special treats. So, Mordechai started walking right to the market. 
8 | P a g e 
As Mordechai walked toward the grocery 
store, a group of Cossacks were riding on 
horseback in the street. They saw Mordechai 
and noticed how happy he seemed. These 
Cossacks did not like to see Jews being happy, 
so it made them angry to see Mordechai so full 
of joy. The leader of the Cossacks rode his horse 
right up to Mordechai and hit him on his arm so 
hard that all the money that the moneylender 
had lent Mordechai fell out of his hand and into the street. 
Now Mordechai was not smiling anymore. His arm hurt and he was very upset 
because he thought that he had lost the money he had borrowed to buy food and wine for 
Shabbos. The Cossacks, however, were very happy that Mordechai was sad. They laughed 
at him and rode away. 
When the Cossacks were gone, Mordechai got down on his hands and knees to 
look for the money that fell out of his hand. While he was looking for the money, he felt 
something big and round in the dirt. He dug it out of the dirt and picked it up and saw 
that it was a very beautiful diamond ring. This ring had a huge diamond and was worth a 
lot of money. Mordechai saw, however, that was not a woman's diamond ring; it was a 
man's ring, the type that Cossack officers wore. 
Mordechai realized that the ring must have belonged to the Cossack who hit him. 
When the Cossack hit him with his gun, the ring must have slipped off his finger and now 
Mordechai found it. 
“Ha, ha,” thought Mordechai. Instead of making Mordechai sad, the Cossack had 
ended up making Mordechai very happy. He had given him a very valuable diamond ring! 
Mordechai sold the diamond ring to the jewelry store for lots and lots of money. He paid 
back the money that he borrowed from the moneylender and got his wife's beautiful gold 
ring back. Mordechai had so much money left over, plenty to buy lots of good Shabbos 
food for many more Shabbosos. 
o
9 | P a g e 
From Rags to Riches 
Mr. Isaac Friedman was one of the thousands of Holocaust survivors that arrived 
in the United States as refugees in the early 1950's. In order to keep Shabbos, Mr. Friedman 
scraped together just enough money to open a small drapery store on the lower level of 
his apartment building in Philadelphia. Business was slow. Nonetheless, every Friday 
before sunset he would close his store and go upstairs to get ready for Shabbos. 
One Friday, just before closing, three people entered. "My name is Henry Ballod," 
said the leader. "We've come from Wildwood, New Jersey, and we need drapes for our 
motel. It's got eighty windows - can you handle it?" 
Realizing that such a large job would require many hours of material selection, Mr. 
Friedman knew there was no way it could be completed before Shabbos. Politely but 
firmly, he said, "I'm a religious Jew and I don't work past sunset on Friday. Please come 
back after the weekend and I'll be glad to help you." 
"Are you mad?!" shouted Mr. Ballod. "We came from over a hundred miles away. 
We don't have time to wait for you. We'll go elsewhere." And they stormed out. 
"I'll do a cheaper and better job," Mr. Friedman called after them. "Just come back 
after Shabbos." 
Monday morning, to Mr. Friedman's great surprise, the men returned. Without 
mentioning a word about Friday's incident, they chose their drapes and gave him a deposit. 
Mr. Friedman completed the job, and they were satisfied. After that, business really picked 
up. Mr. Friedman was ordering supplies by the truckload. Just weeks ago, he was an 
unknown penniless immigrant; now he had a booming business. 
Months later, Mr. Friedman was in Wildwood, New Jersey, when he heard a voice 
from across the street. "Friedman - I sent them all." 
Mr. Friedman looked up and saw Mr. Ballod beaming at him. He told Mr. Friedman 
that at a recent hotel and motel owner's convention, he took the podium and told the 
whole audience about his experience.  
"I told them how you insisted on closing the store before sunset on Friday, despite 
the fear of losing such a big job. I told everyone how impressed I was by the way you 
respected G-d more than money. Your morals are more important to you than the bottom 
line. And in the end, you did a good job for a good price. Someone like you, I told them, 
can be trusted!"  
10 | P a g e 
Shabbos in Mexico 
The negotiations were taking much longer than expected. Two representatives of a 
real estate conglomerate were trying to complete the purchase of an office building in 
downtown Mexico City, and the lawyers were discussing the details slowly and 
meticulously. Every office had to be inspected, the insurance policies verified, and the 
terms of payment specified to the last penny. Jacobo Sherem, the managing partner of the 
owners' group, was desperate to complete the transaction. With every passing moment, he 
was becoming more impatient and exasperated. 
An architect by profession, Jacobo had been trying to sell this particular office 
building for months, so that he could finally turn a profit on his investment. He had 
designed, bought and sold buildings in the past, but this building on Calle Presa Salinillas 
had been his biggest investment, and so far, it had been a losing proposition for his group. 
Due to the depressed financial climate in Mexico, most of the office space was unoccupied, 
so Jacobo was not making a profit. 
As the hours passed, Jacobo became increasingly nervous. The buyers had told him 
unequivocally that they were leaving Mexico on the first plane out the next morning, which 
was Saturday. They would not delay their trip. If they could complete the purchase that 
day, that would be wonderful; otherwise they would cancel the negotiations and move on 
to prospective deals in other countries. 
It was the late hour of the day, Friday, that was putting pressure on Jacobo. For the 
last year, he had been attending evening study classes in the Aram Tzovah Kollel in the 
Polanco section of Mexico City. He studied Torah a few nights a week, but he was not yet 
Shomer Shabbos. After many discussions, much introspection and inspiration from kollel 
members at Aram Tzovah, Jacobo and his wife Sophia were inching closer to total 
commitment to Shabbos observance. Jacobo had already started going to Shul every 
Friday night and his office was closed on Shabbos, but he and Sophia were not yet 
completely Shomer Shabbos. 
Frustrated at being so close, yet so far, from fulfilling his dream of selling the 
building, Jacobo looked at his watch and saw that there was less than an hour and a half 
to Shabbos. Reluctantly, he told the prospective buyers that the negotiations would have 
to continue Sunday or Monday - he had to leave and close his office. The buyers threatened 
that it was now or never, for they were flying out of the country the next day. But Jacobo 
would not budge. Shabbos was coming. He hadn't missed a Friday night at Shul in weeks 
11 | P a g e 
and he wasn't going to miss tonight. The buyers were incredulous that Jacobo would 
scuttle a deal that could lift him out of the financial doldrums, but he would not be moved. 
The parties to the negotiations bid each other a final farewell, and Jacobo went home to 
prepare for Shabbos. 
He couldn't help but second guess himself. Had he acted correctly? There would 
be other Shabbosos when he would be in Shul, but now he might never be able to sell this 
building that was becoming an albatross around his financial holdings. He tried to enjoy 
that Shabbos, but it was difficult. An internal debate raged in his mind. He was proud of 
his commitment but he wondered if it was worth the price. 
Two weeks later, early Thursday morning, September 19, 1985 (during Selichos of 
the Aseres Yemei Teshuvah), Mexico was struck by the greatest tragedy in its history. In a 
matter of seconds, a monstrous, rumbling earthquake gashed and shook Mexico City, 
toppling buildings, swallowing homes, wreaking havoc and bringing instantaneous death 
to thousands of people! Within 24 hours, as the country staggered to adjust to the shock 
and magnitude of the Thursday tragedy, an aftershock shook the city. In the downtown 
district, there was utter devastation. People searched in vain for relatives and friends, but 
it was mostly for naught. The destruction, mayhem and sorrow were beyond imagination. 
Yet, amidst all the devastation, one building 
remained standing - the one Jacobo couldn't sell. Its 
windows were blown out and some of the facade of the 
building had peeled off, but remarkably, it was structurally 
sound. The Mexican government had to regroup; aid and 
rescue efforts had to be directed and coordinated. People 
needed the assurance that the government was functioning 
and accessible. Thus, within days of the earthquakes, 
Jacobo's building, conveniently located downtown, was 
checked for its strength and stability. When it passed 
inspection, the government bought most of the offices in 
the building and the remaining space was sold to large 
corporations who had lost their offices when other 
buildings collapsed or were deemed unsafe. Jacobo's extraordinary profit was far beyond 
what he would have made had he sold the building weeks before. The deals for his building 
propelled Jacobo into a category of wealth he never imagined. 
The Hashgachah Pratis of the Shabbos not allowing him to sell the building 
propelled him into being a total Shomer Shabbos. Jacobo and Sophia never told the story 
12 | P a g e 
to anyone. Word got out that their building was sold to the government, but no one in the 
community knew about the frantic Friday negotiations two weeks before the earthquakes, 
and Jacobo's decision to close his office for Shabbos. 
Years later, in the palatial lobby of his new magnificent office building, Jacobo and 
Sophia tendered a grand party in honor of his first siyum of a Gemara, which he had 
studied for several years with Rabbi Shea Deutsch at the Aram Tzovah Kollel. There, in 
the presence of Rabbis, community leaders and friends, Jacobo told the story of that 
Shabbos that changed his life. 
o
A Candy for Shabbos 
Towards the end of his life, Rav Aharon Kotler was unable to swallow 
anything – no solids, no liquids, not even a drop of water. All his fluids and food came 
through an intravenous tube. This sad situation resulted 
in a mouth that was so dry it was difficult for the Rosh 
Yeshiva to speak. 
One Wednesday, the doctor allowed Rav Aharon 
to have a candy to suck on to make him feel better. The 
student, who was with Rav Aharon to help take care of 
him, was very happy to tell the Rosh Yeshiva the good 
news. With great effort, Rav Aharon responded, “A 
candy? I’m going to save it for Shabbos!” 
o
Watering the Plants 
When Rav Shimon Yehudah HaKohen Shkop first arrived in Grodno to serve as 
13 | P a g e 
Rosh Yeshiva, he stayed in the home of a very nice family. The family showed the tzaddik 
great respect. All his needs where provided for. 
Yet, despite all the luxuries and attention, there was one thing missing. On Friday, 
there was no job that that the Rosh Yeshiva could do to honor Shabbos. All the Erev 
Shabbos chores were already accounted for. 
Then Rav Shkop discovered the flowerpots that were all over the spacious home. 
He accepted the responsibility of watering the many plants and keeping their green leaves 
clean …. L'kavod Shabbos- in Honor of the Holy Shabbos!  
o
Kabbalas Shabbos - A Source of Merit 
The Ridvaz was the Rabbi of Slutzk in the 16th century and one of the gedolim of 
his generation. One day, he became very sick and his life hung in the balance. His 
neshamah was brought before the Beis Din shel Ma’alah – The Heavenly Court. He was 
informed that it had been decreed that he die before his time and he was asked to state 
whether he possessed any significant reason or merit that might alter the decree and let 
him remain in this world. 
The Ridvaz asked the Beis Din if serving as the Rav of Slutzk, one of the largest 
Jewish communities of the time, was a great enough merit for him to return to this world. 
The Beis Din shel Ma’alah weighed this, and concluded that this was not enough. Someone 
else could be the Rav of Slutzk. 
The Ridvaz then mentioned that he was in the middle of writing a commentary on 
the Talmud Yerushalmi. If he died now, it would not be completed and many people 
would have a hard time learning without it. The Beis Din considered this claim, and then 
rejected it. There were already a number of fine commentaries on the Yerushalmi. 
In a final attempt to save his life, the Ridvaz argued that every Erev Shabbos after 
midday, he would stop all his weekday activities, and simply sit and eagerly await the arrival 
of Shabbos. Surely, the sincere longing that he had shown for Shabbos was a great source 
of merit. 
After deliberation, the Beis Din shel Ma’alah accepted this argument, and in this 
merit, the Ridvaz was granted another 30 years of life! 
14 | P a g e 
"Sha...Boss!" 
Many years ago in New York City there lived a man named Reb Chaim Gelb. Each 
week, Reb Chaim would have to find a new job. On Monday he would begin work, would 
work for a few days, only to be fired on Friday because he refused to work on Shabbos. 
Reb Chaim once found a job working in a men's clothing store that sold things such 
as suits, jackets and coats. Since he was such a good and honest worker, his boss did not 
fire him, even after Reb Chaim told him that he would not come to work on Shabbos. He 
worked the entire week and remained home on Shabbos. 
One Friday afternoon, the boss called over Reb Chaim and said, "Mr. Gelb, I want 
you to come to work tomorrow. Some of my other workers are sick so I need you to do 
some of their work.” The boss insisted that Reb Chaim work on Shabbos – that he be 
mechalel Shabbos! 
Reb Chaim did not argue. He just looked 
straight at the boss and said “Sha…Boss!” 
The boss thought that Reb Chaim was 
saying “Shabbos” so he answered, “I know that 
tomorrow is Shabbos, but I need you here. I do 
not have enough workers. You are going to 
have to come to work tomorrow.” 
Reb Chaim did not argue. He just looked 
straight at the boss and said, “Sha…Boss!” 
The boss started to get upset. “Mr. 
Gelb,” he said, “I know that tomorrow is 
Shabbos, but you still have to come to work!” 
Reb Chaim did not argue. He just looked straight at the boss and said, “Sha…Boss!” 
The boss suddenly realized what Reb Chaim was saying. He was saying, “Sha, Boss - be quiet boss.” He was telling his boss to be quiet and not say that he had to come to 
work on Shabbos. 
The boss got very angry. He said, “Mr. Gelb, you are fired! You cannot work here 
anymore.” Reb Chaim had lost his job. 
That Shabbos, Reb Chaim was very, very happy. He had shown Hashem how much 
he loved Shabbos, and that he would never ever be mechalel Shabbos. 
15 | P a g e 
Not long after that, Reb Chaim found another job in a different store. This entire 
store was closed every Shabbos. From then on, Reb Chaim never had to worry about 
having to work on Shabbos. 
o
Splurging on Shabbos Wine 
The mother of Rebbi Zakkai had a special 
beautiful head covering which she wore Shabbos 
night. When she put it on, she felt it raised the 
level of Kedushas Shabbos to new heights. 
One Erev Shabbos, her son, Rebbi 
Zakkai, did not have any money to buy wine. 
Shabbos was getting closer and Rebbi Zakkai 
went to Shul without having bought wine for 
Kiddush. When he returned from Shul, he 
noticed his mother was not wearing her beautiful 
Shabbos head covering that she always wore. Yet, she looked as exquisite as ever, beaming 
with happiness. He then noticed on the table a bottle of wine. Not just any wine, but a 
bottle of very expensive wine standing gallantly on the table waiting for Kiddush.  
Rebbi Zakkai understood what happened and went over to her and gave her a very 
warm brachah for her devotion and great sacrifice L'Kavod Shabbos. The next year, Rebbi 
Zakkai's fortune took a turn upward and he became a very wealthy man. The first thing 
he did was to go out and buy his mother a magnificent head covering shining with precious 
stones. 
When Rebbi Zakkai's mother passed away, she left over for Rebbi Zakkai three 
hundred barrels of wine as an inheritance. When Rebbi Zakkai was niftar, he left over 
three thousand barrels of wine. All this was in the zechus of honoring Shabbos with the 
very best wine.  
16 | P a g e 
Shabbos is a Gutte Zach  
(Shabbos saves the Day) 
Shabbos Protection  
Mr. David Solomon was what you would call a 'self-made man.' He lived in 
Manhattan and had built himself up from almost nothing with his ‘own two hands.' He 
started out poor, but was now a multi-millionaire with several factories and substantial 
holdings on Wall Street and he knew exactly how loudly money 'talks'. 
Of course, there was no place in his life for Yiddishkeit, for Shabbos, for Kashrus, 
and no time for anything except business ... and family. 
The most precious of all his possessions 
was his eighteen-year-old daughter. She was the 
apple of his eye. Her picture was on his desk and 
every wall of his office. He dreamed of the day that 
she would marry and he would see grandchildren. 
He even had a special fund saved up to buy her a 
new house and whatever she needed. And that day 
would soon arrive. 
He was sitting in his office when the phone 
rang. “Mr. Solomon?" asked an official sounding 
voice on the other end of the line. 
"Yes." 
"Have you got a daughter by the name of Sarah Solomon?" the caller inquired. 
Again, he answered, "Yes." 
"This is a police officer speaking from County hospital. You'd better get down here 
fast, Mr. Solomon. Your daughter has been in a pretty serious car accident." 
Mr. Solomon asked a few questions to make sure it wasn't a prank, slammed the 
phone down, grabbed his keys and raced out of the office. 
It was a nightmare. She was in critical condition; she laid in bed in a coma. Wires 
and instruments were attached to every part of her body. The doctors said it was 
17 | P a g e 
impossible to operate until her condition stabilized. 
He stood there, weeping. What could he do? His wife arrived and she, too, burst 
out in tears. 
The next few days were practically sleepless. They waited in the hall for some news 
from the doctors. Perhaps she opened her eyes? Perhaps there was some improvement? 
But the only message of hope he received was his father's suggestion to travel to 
Brooklyn and meet with Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson, the Lubavitcher Rebbe. 
"He's the only one who can help," his father said. "I have friends that he did big 
miracles for. If anyone can help you, he can. Just go, get an appointment and try to see 
him." 
David's emotions began flipping. At first, he was excited; there was hope! But then 
he became disappointed...in himself. What? I, David Solomon, a normal, successful 
American businessman going to a religious man, a Rabbi no less, to seek out a miracle? 
Then suddenly, he was afraid. "I don't do any of the commandments. How can I go to 
this Rabbi? I'll be so ashamed." 
But then his confidence returned. He remembered his money. "I'll give a big 
donation and the Rabbi will certainly hear what I have to say." 
David drove to the Rebbe's headquarters in Brooklyn to arrange a private meeting. 
Usually, people had to wait for months to see him, but because of the urgency, that very 
evening he was standing before the Rebbe. 
"Rebbe!" He began to cry. "My daughter had a terrible accident. She is in critical 
condition. Rebbe, can you save her? Here, here is a check for fifty thousand dollars! For 
your institutions." 
The Rebbe just looked at him without seeming to notice the check and said, "If you 
want to save your daughter, you must begin to observe Shabbos." 
"Rebbe," he replied, "I can't promise such a thing. I'm a very busy man and I'm not 
a religious Jew. Here!" He took out his checkbook put it on the Rebbe's desk and began 
writing, "Here. One hundred thousand dollars! Please, Rebbe, please take it, just save my 
daughter." 
The Rebbe looked at him even more intently and said, "Mr. Solomon I am here to 
help you, I'm not thinking of myself. If you want her to be healthy, keep the Shabbos." 
"Rebbe, here!" Solomon signed his name to another check and placed it before the 
Rebbe. "It's an open check. Write what you want. Take what you need, just save her!!" He 
18 | P a g e 
was really crying now. Looking deeply into the Rebbe's eyes for some hope. 
"Hashem is responsible for her healing." the Rebbe replied. "You must appeal to 
Him. I can only help with prayer but you must also do your part. At least keep the Shabbos. 
Then your daughter will be healthy and you will even see grandchildren from her." 
Mr. Solomon gathered up his checks. He said he would think about it, shook the 
Rebbe's hand and left, and closed the door after himself. He waited around for a while 
outside the door, hoping that the Rebbe would call him back. But he didn't. Mr. Solomon 
returned to the hospital empty handed. 
That night he couldn't sleep. The meeting with the Rebbe made a deep impression 
on him. The Rebbe's face danced before his eyes saying, "I am here to help you, not to 
help myself. Keep Shabbos..." It was the first time in his life he met a man that was not 
interested in his own personal profit. 
Meanwhile, Sarah's condition continued to get worse. 
Mr. Solomon turned to his wife and said, “This Shabbos we won't drive or turn on 
any lights. I mean, we'll be staying in the hospital anyway, so we have nowhere to go. I 
think I remember how to make Kiddush; we can at least begin to do what Rabbi 
Schneerson said." 
That Sunday, there was some improvement, and the next Sunday she opened her 
eyes for the first time in a month. 
Mr. Solomon became a Shomer Shabbos Jew and his daughter Sarah not only 
became completely healed, she eventually got married and had several children. Just as the 
Rebbe said. After all, if we do our part, Hashem will do His. 
o
Sir Moshe Montefiore and the Czar 
A long time ago, when Czars ruled Russia, the Czar made a law that Jews could not 
learn Torah, daven in Shul, or do any other mitzvos. The Jews did not like these rules, so 
they tried to continue learning and doing mitzvos secretly. The Yidden were very unhappy 
and wanted to leave Russia, but the Czar was very mean and made another new law 
forbidding any Jews from leaving Russia. 
19 | P a g e 
At that time, faraway in England there lived a very rich Jewish man named Sir 
Moshe Montefiore. When he heard that how hard it was for the Yidden in Russia, he 
decided to try and help. So, Sir Moshe Montefiore sent a letter to the Czar asking to be 
invited to visit Russia because he had something very important that he wished to discuss 
with the Czar. 
When the Czar received Sir Moshe Montefiore’s telegram, he wrote back inviting 
him to come to Russia. Sir Moshe Montefiore packed a suitcase and traveled to Russia, 
and approached the palace to speak with the Czar. “If you let the Jews exit Russia," he 
said, “I will pay you ONE THOUSAND rubles for each Jew that you allow to leave!” The 
Czar liked that idea because it meant he would make a lot of money and the Czar really 
loved money. 
Sir Moshe Montefiore suggested that they write up a contract. So, he took out two 
pieces of paper and on each one he wrote that the Czar promised to let the Yidden leave 
Russia, and that Sir Moshe Montefiore promised to give the Czar 1,000 rubles for each 
Jew that left the country. They both signed their names at the bottom of each piece of 
paper and Sir Moshe Montefiore returned to his hotel with his copy of the contract. 
The next day, the Czar had a meeting and showed all his advisors the contract he 
had signed with Sir Moshe Montefiore. He told them he was very excited because now he 
could let the Jews leave Russia and he would make a lot of money. However, his advisors 
were not happy. “That is not a good idea,” they said, “The Jews pay a lot of money in 
taxes. If they leave Russia, they won't pay you any more money and you will end up losing 
money instead of making it!” 
“But I already signed a contract,” the Czar cried, “I gave my word. If I change my 
mind and don't keep my promise, all the kings throughout the world will make fun of me 
and say that I do not keep my promises.” The Czars advisors were very wicked just like 
the Czar, so they advised him send a soldier to kill Sir Moshe. That way, no one would 
ever know about the contract, and if no one knows about the contract, no one will realize 
that the Czar did not keep his promise. 
“I can't do that,” said the Czar. “Everyone knows that I invited Sir Moshe 
Montefiore to come to Russia to speak with me. If my soldiers kill him, everyone will say 
that I tricked him when I invited him to Russia.” 
Finally, one of the Czar's advisors said, “You must kill Sir Moshe in such a way that 
no one will ever know that it was you who killed him. In our country, there is a special 
poisonous plant. We can take the plant and burn it in a box. The poison from the plant 
20 | P a g e 
will go into the smoke and while the smoke is still in the box, we can seal the box tightly 
before the smoke escapes. Then we can send the box to Sir Moshe. When he opens the 
package, he will breathe in the poisonous smoke and die. No one will ever know that he 
was killed by the poisonous smoke and no one will think that the Czar killed him.” 
The Czar thought this was a great idea so he ordered one of his servants to put the 
poisonous plant into a small iron box and burn it. Before the smoke could get out, he 
sealed the box tightly and wrapped it up like a present. Then the Czar called over a soldier 
and ordered him to deliver it to Sir Moshe right away. Of course, the Czar did not tell the 
soldier that the box contained poisonous smoke; he just told the soldier that it was a very 
important gift for Sir Moshe and that he should get it to him quickly. The soldier took the 
package from the Czar, jumped on his horse, and rode directly to Sir Moshe's hotel. When 
the soldier finally arrived at the hotel, it was Shabbos afternoon. He knocked on the door, 
and when Sir Moshe answered the door, he told him, “I have a package for you from the 
Czar.” However, since it was Shabbos, Sir Moshe told the soldier, “Thank you very much, 
but I cannot open the package now because today is our Shabbos.” 
The soldier replied that the Czar said it was a very important package and that he 
must open it right away. Sir Moshe did not want to be mechalel Shabbos and said he would 
open it as soon as Shabbos was over. The soldier offered to open it for Sir Moshe. When 
he opened the tightly sealed box, the poisonous smoke went into the soldier’s face, right 
in front of Sir Moshe's eyes. The soldier fell on the floor, dead. Sir Moshe realized that the 
Czar had wanted to kill him, not the soldier. He knew that once the Czar would find out 
that he was alive, he would look for another way to kill him, so right after Havdalah, Sir 
Moshe packed a suitcase and left Russia, never to return. Sir Moshe was rescued from this 
evil plan because he refused to be mechalel Shabbos. 
o
The Business of Keeping Shabbos 
Shabbos is a very special time of the week, and we cannot perform any melacha 
(work) on Shabbos. There's a wonderful story about a Yid who gave up everything to keep 
Shabbos, so that he wouldn't have to work on Shabbos. He gave up the opportunity to 
make a lot of money, in exchange for protecting the kedushah of Shabbos. 
21 | P a g e 
Today, it is so easy to keep Shabbos! Seventy years ago in America, however, it was 
not so easy. In those days, if a person did not want to work on Shabbos, he would be fired 
from his job, and would be left without a parnassah. Reb Moshe Diskind went to work to 
make money to support his family. He would walk into a business and say, “Can I work 
for you?” The boss would reply, “Sure, come tomorrow morning and I will give you a job. 
You can earn some money and take it home for your family, and you will be able to buy 
something to eat.”  
He came in the next day, Monday, and worked. After work, his boss gave him that 
day’s payment. He came in Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday. On Friday, my 
great uncle went over to the boss to get his money from the day’s work. The boss said 
“Here’s your pay. I expect you to be here tomorrow morning, on Saturday.” My great 
uncle said, “I am sorry, I am not allowed to work on our holy Shabbos!” The boss replied, 
“If you don’t come in tomorrow morning, then don't bother coming on Monday morning 
either!” He was fired from that job. He did not feel sad. He went home that Shabbos, and 
enjoyed a wonderful Shabbos with his family. Reb Moshe was smiling and singing zemiros 
the whole time. But after Shabbos, he started to worry about finding work again the 
following week. 
Baruch Hashem, he found another business. He went to this other business and the 
boss said, “No problem. You can work for me.” This boss was a nice man. So, that 
Monday, he started to work. He worked Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday. 
That Friday, his boss told him, “I expect you to be here on Saturday.” Reb Moshe told 
him, “I'm sorry, but I can't work for you on my Shabbos. I am willing to come in and 
work all day Sunday. I am a hard worker, please let me keep my job.” The boss said, “If 
you can work very late on Friday night, maybe until around 10:00 pm, then I won't make 
you come in on Saturday.” But Reb Moshe said, “I'm so sorry, I cannot.” To which the 
boss replied, “I'm sorry, too - you are fired." 
This happened now twice! But Reb Moshe knew in his heart that he was doing the 
right thing, and when you do the right thing, Hashem will help you. 
Again, he found another job and started to work. This new boss was very nice. He 
worked for him on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and on Friday he was very 
scared. He didn’t know what was going to happen when he went in to get his money. Reb 
Moshe went in and the boss did not say one word about Shabbos. Reb Moshe was so 
excited! He took his money and walked out of the door. As he started walking down the 
street, suddenly his boss started running down the street after him calling out “Stop, Stop!” 
When his boss caught up to him he said, “I forgot to tell you one thing. That is, we have 
22 | P a g e 
business every day of the week except Sunday.” Reb Moshe said to him, “Please, I am 
such a good worker. Do me a favor, I’m willing to work on Sunday, but please let me not 
come in on Shabbos." And the boss answered, “I feel bad for you, but I can't, and if you 
don't come back tomorrow morning, you can't come back on Monday morning.”  
Again, Moshe was not sad. He went home again and for the third straight Shabbos, 
he barely had enough food to eat; not to mention no nosh or soda. He had barely enough 
food to eat. But, he knew for certain that he was doing the right thing. That Friday night, 
he went to Shul, davened and said, “Hashem please help me find a job somewhere to help 
my family.” And when a Yid davens sincerely, Hashem will listen to his prayers. 
On Monday, Reb Moshe heard about a new business in Manhattan. They were  
making staples and paperclips and pens and all sorts of office supplies. So, Reb Moshe 
called up and asked if he could work there, and the boss said, “Fine, 
come right over, I need another worker.” Reb Moshe worked 
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday. By Friday morning, he 
was nervous. Would he get fired for the fourth week in a row? Friday 
morning, he knocked on the door to collect his money for the week. 
The door opened and the owner said, “Moshe! You probably came 
to get your money, but I need you to have a seat for a second.” Reb 
Moshe thought to himself, "Oh no, here we go again," and he started 
turning red in the face. The owner looked at Reb Moshe and asked, 
“Why are you getting so nervous? I'm about to give you your money 
for the week.” Reb Moshe replied, “I am very nervous because I know 
what you are going to say to me. You are probably going to tell me 
that I have to work on Shabbos and that if I don’t, I’ll be fired.” 
“Wrong!” said his boss. “I need you to do me a big favor. You know, I’m a big boss 
with many other businesses to run. I don’t want to run this business any more. I want to 
take my money out of this company, but I want to give the company over to someone 
who will run it well. I want YOU to be the new owner of this company.” 
Moshe looks and him in shock and answered, “What?!?! Me? The owner? How?”  
The boss said, “Yes, don’t worry about the details; we can work them out Monday 
morning!” 
Reb Moshe successfully ran that company for 50 years! He was rewarded for one 
simple reason. He never gave up on Shabbos. 
23 | P a g e 
Shabbos in the Herman Home 
Rav Yaakov Yosef Herman and his wife hovered over the hospital bed, awaiting 
some sign of improvement. This week has been a difficult one for Rav Herman. His 
daughter, Esther, had been hospitalized in serious condition and the prognosis was grim. 
On Friday afternoon, Rav Herman and his wife reluctantly left Esther’s bedside to 
prepare for the many Shabbos guests that were always welcomed at their table. Rav 
Herman reassured his wife, “Surely in the merit of oneg Shabbos, our Esther will get 
better.” 
Troubles and sorrows were put aside with the muktzeh items in the Herman home. 
With great joy, Rav Herman recited Kiddush, sliced the challah, and entertained their 
guests. His wife happily served a delicious Shabbos meal. 
The telegram arrived the next morning 
while Rav Herman was at Shul. One of Rav 
Herman daughters received the news: her sick 
sister had passed away. She decided that she 
would not let this distressing news ruin her 
parents’ Shabbos joy! She would keep the 
terrible secret until Shabbos was over.  
After 
Havdalah, the young girl 
approached her parents with a heavy heart with 
the sad news. However, before she could open her mouth to speak, there was a hard knock 
at the door. Another telegram arrived, which read, "ESTHER HERMAN. STOP. OUT 
OF DANGER. STOP.”  
After some investigation, the Hermans solved the mystery. Esther was alive and 
had even taken a turn for the better! Due to some confusion at the hospital, the first 
telegram must have been sent in error! 
“This is the merit of Shabbos!” Rav Herman excitedly told his family, ecstatic. “One 
who honors Shabbos merits everything!” 
o
24 | P a g e 
Onions L’Kavod Shabbos 
Reb Avrom was a farmer, and he was walking home one cool Spring on Erev 
Shabbos. He was always happy this time of year. After months of work, plowing, planting, 
pruning and taking care of his crops, he was close to seeing his hard work pay off. As Reb 
Avrom was walking, he slowly lifted his head and turned his face toward the sky. He 
worriedly realized, “Oh no! It looks like it’s going to rain.”  
After Pesach, in the springtime, it usually doesn't rain, and when it does, it’s not 
good for the crops. He thought to himself, “I have so many patches of onions that I 
planted and worked so hard to care for. I plowed, pulled the weeds, and worked so 
diligently. The whole process took nearly 4 months! Now, if the onions would be left out 
in the rain, they would be ruined. If the rain comes, it will flood my whole field and all 
those weeks of work will be lost. Maybe the rain will wash away my fields and my 
livelihood!” He reassured himself, “No! We all know that Shabbos is the Mekor 
HaBrachah - the source of all blessing.”  
When Reb Avrom walked into his house, 
his wife and children had a worried look on their 
faces. “Father, did you see what we saw? All 
those dark clouds make it look like it's going to 
rain and ruin your crops.” Reb Avrom replied, 
“No! Shabbos is here. We will have a regular 
Shabbos.” He tried to calm them down as he sat 
down to begin the meal. As the whole family sat 
down, they started hearing banging and loud 
noises from outside. The family looked out the 
window to see all the neighbors putting down big sheets of plastic over their fields, to save 
their crops from the rains. “Oh no! The rain is going to come!” The children started to 
scream. “Maybe we should also cover our fields. All of our vegetables and onions, all of 
that hard work may be lost! Father, all of our neighbors are covering their fields to protect 
them.” To which Reb Avrom answered, “No! Shabbos is the Mekor HaBrachah - source 
of all blessing.” With that, he started to sing. Right in the middle of Shalom Aliechem, 
they heard the unmistakable should of thunder crashing, and the rain started to fall. Soon, 
a torrential downpour rained from the clouds. The boys looked out the window and saw 
all those other fields covered with tarps. Our farmer, Avrom, was sitting in his house 
singing zemiros, thinking in the back of his mind, “Shabbos is the Mekor HaBrachah - 
25 | P a g e 
source of all blessing. Nothing bad can happen if I keep Shabbos well.”  
That whole night, it continued to rain. Many of the farmers who had run out to 
cover their fields with plastic tarps were Yidden and were mechalel Shabbos in the process. 
But Avrom refused to be mechalel Shabbos. All Shabbos long, his family was worried, but 
whenever they looked at their father, he was so calm. He sang zemiros at the table, told 
over divrei Torah, davened and relaxed the whole day. Even after Havdalah, Reb Avrom 
didn’t go outside to check what was going on. He ate Melave Malka as if everything was 
fine. 
Sunday morning after Shacharis, our dear Reb Avrom was walking and he saw all 
his neighbors, all those unfortunate people who were mechalel Shabbos, and they were all 
crying. “Look at this! We spent all our time and effort trying to save our fields, and they 
are all ruined.” Reb Avrom asked what exactly had happened. They answered, “You will 
never believe it. Friday night when all the frum Jews were eating their meal, we were 
preparing our fields. We were covering them with these large tarps of plastic to make sure 
they were not ruined by the rain. Do you know what happened? We just went to take them 
off, and all our vegetables were ruined. The plastic ruined them!”  
Avrom ran to check his own fields. To his amazement, all the onions were fresh 
and good. Yes, it rained heavily right on his vegetables, but all the next day, Shabbos, the 
sun was so strong it dried up all his fields. But all the people who broke Shabbos, the sun 
made their vegetables rot under the tarps. 
Reb Avrom walked into his house while his children were eating breakfast. He 
looked at them and said, “Didn't I tell you Shabbos is the source of all blessing?! The 
Ribbono Shel Olam saved all our onions because we kept Shabbos! Know that a Jew must 
keep Shabbos and look, when we keep Shabbos, Shabbos keeps and protects us. 
o
Straus Bank is Closed on Shabbos! 
Jews in Karlsruhe, Germany, were given many rights and lived in relatively peaceful 
conditions in the late 17th century. The Jewish community flourished in this city, located 
along the Rhine River, a short distance from France. 
26 | P a g e 
Shmuel Straus was a banker in Karlsruhe, and he enjoyed a happy life. When he 
wasn’t working, he spent time learning with his children, doing chessed for his friends and 
neighbors, and learning Torah. Shmuel earned just enough to support his family without 
any worries. He was known to be a Yarei Shomayim - Fearing Hashem - and therefore he 
did all his business dealings honestly. 
Shmuel's first job was running a small bank. He got the job from his father-in-law 
right after his marriage. With a permit from the government, Shmuel would mainly 
exchange money for different businessmen who travelled to various countries. He would 
also invest money for people. When he first started working, Shmuel bought a special coat 
with two large pockets, one where he would place 'accounts receivable,' and one for 
currency exchange. 
One Erev Shabbos morning, before going to the Bris of his friend's son, he put on 
a special coat that he would wear on Shabbos, Yamim Tovim, and special occasions. He 
transferred the bundles of money he ordinarily kept in his other coat to this special coat. 
Following the simchah, he continued on his way to work as usual, changing money and 
accepting payments. 
At noon, he left work to help in the preparations for Shabbos Kodesh. After his 
wife lit the Shabbos candles, he put on his Shabbos coat, bid farewell to his wife and small 
children, and headed to Shul. 
Shabbos was a special day for Shmuel, and he'd spend it in Shul, davening and 
learning. He spent precious time with his family. For the Shabbos meal, they would always 
have many guests. That particular Shabbos was no different. As he walked the quiet route 
back from Shul, he took the time to think about the words of Torah he would say at the 
Shabbos table. His guests would soon arrive with their families at his home. Shmuel sat 
on the bench on the side of the road as he gathered his thoughts, when he suddenly 
realized that his pockets were still filled with the bundles of money from that day's 
dealings.  
Shmuel was sweating from the thought of having to carry the money. He could not 
bear the idea of using money that he brought home on Shabbos. Sitting in the deserted 
street, he suddenly thought about the joy he would have knowing that he did the right 
thing, and quickly unbuttoned his coat, dropping the wallets on the ground. A blanket of 
relief swept over him. He knew that he would have to repay many debts, and that his 
financial future was in doubt. However, his trust in Hashem helped him make a decision 
that he knew was right. 
27 | P a g e 
That Shabbos was extra joyous for him. He felt that he passed the great test Hashem 
placed in his way. His extra level of simcha was a mystery to his family and the many guests 
who had eaten at his table before. 
As the sun set and the stars came out, Shmuel said Havdalah. His wife held the 
special candle and the family passed around the bisomim - spices - to soothe the neshamah 
upon the departure of the beautiful Shabbos. When he was finished, Shmuel told his family 
what had happened on Friday night, explaining the reason for his extra joyous Shabbos. 
He also told them that it may be the beginning of a more difficult life. His wife accepted 
the will of Hashem and assured the family that everything will turn out for the best. 
The same night, Shmuel decided to check the route he'd used, hoping to find the 
wallets he'd dropped. Amazingly, he did! As Shmuel opened the door to his home, the 
family breathed a sigh of relief, for the wallets were intact with the full sum of money 
inside them. 
A few days later, the Minister of Finances of the Baden region heard about the 
trustworthy Straus bank, and entrusted Shmuel with a huge sum of money. The investment 
in the bank spread and many well-to-do people invested their money with Shmuel. His 
Shemiras Shabbos was rewarded with great wealth. 
Today, Shmuel's legacy lives on in Yerushalayim, where the Straus Courtyard, a 
place of Torah learning, stands in his name. His children sold Straus & Company in 1938 
when they fled from Germany and relocated to America. 
o
The Miller Who was Mechalel Shabbos 
Many years ago lived a Yid who owned a millstone. People came from the 
surrounding villages with sacks of wheat to grind into flour. However, the Yid was not 
able to keep all the money he earned. He had to pay the poritz (landlord) half of whatever 
he earned from grinding the wheat. 
One Friday night, when the Yid came home from Shul, he was so tired that he had 
to rest for a few minutes. However, instead of resting a few minutes, he fell into a deep 
sleep and didn't wake up until the morning. He had missed Kiddush Friday night and the 
28 | P a g e 
entire seudah! The next morning, he was sad and embarrassed to hear what had happened. 
But the next Friday night it happened again. He came home from Shul, and he was so 
tired that he had to rest for a few minutes, and he soon fell into a deep sleep and didn't 
wake up until morning. He had missed Kiddush Friday night and the entire seudah again! 
The next week it happened again, and again the week after that…  
Week after week, the miller found himself more and more sad about what was 
happening. "Oh, no! Not again!" cried the miller in frustration. "What is happening? 
Nothing helps! I can't go on like this. Tomorrow I'm going to the Rebbe!"  
The next day, he went to Rebbe Shmuel Abba of Zichlin and told him the whole 
story. Bursting into tears, he begged to be rescued from this bizarre situation. 
"I don't know how I can help you," replied the tzaddik, "It must be that you were 
mechalel Shabbos, so measure-for-measure, you are being prevented from honoring her."  
The Yid became even more upset. "I don't understand. I'm so careful with the laws 
of Shabbos. Breaking Shabbos? I don't know how that is possible." 
The Rebbe listened to him, but simply repeated that the uncontrollable sleep was a 
punishment for violating Shabbos. 
Broken-hearted, the Yid returned home. When he told his family all that the Rebbe 
had said, they were astonished. Everyone knew how careful their father was about keeping 
Shabbos. One of his sons spoke up. "Tatte, I have to tell you that the Rebbe's words are 
true. One Friday night, when I was up late, I saw you get up in the middle of the night. 
You were obviously still half asleep and unaware. I saw you light a candle so you could see 
your way to get a drink of water, and then you extinguished it when you were finished. 
The next morning it was clear that you had no memory of what had happened, and not 
wanting to shame you or show disrespect, I never said anything. But now that the Rebbe 
himself hinted to it, I realize that I must tell you what I saw." 
The man thanked his son, and immediately set forth for Zichlin again. He told the 
Rebbe what his son had reported.  
"Please Rebbe," sobbed the man, "tell me how to do Teshuvah!" 
"I told you, I can't do anything. The only 'remedy' is that you have to show Shabbos 
how important she is to you. When you stand up for Shabbos, Shabbos will be appeased 
of your insult." 
A few days later, the Yid was called to his poritz, the nobleman from whom he 
received the right to operate his mill in exchange for annual rent and a percentage of its 
income. The poritz informed him that he wanted to earn more money and therefore it 
29 | P a g e 
would be necessary for the Yid to work the mill on Saturdays as well, starting now. 
"That's impossible." The Jew declared 
firmly. "I only work six days, never on 
Shabbos." 
"Oh, come on," said the nobleman, "I 
know you Jews. You can get around it if you 
want. I heard that a Rabbi can make some kind 
of contract where you can stay home, but the 
mill stays open." 
"That is not how I keep Shabbos!" the 
miller firmly declared.  
The poritz raised his voice. "Fool! I'll give 
you two months to complete the renovations needed to keep the mill open on Shabbos. 
If you don't, I'll throw you out." 
When the two months were up, the poritz sent for him again and asked for his 
decision. Realizing that the moment the Rebbe had spoken of had come, the Yid 
responded quickly that he will never work on Shabbos in any way no matter what happens, 
and just as quickly, the nobleman threw him out! 
With no mill to work, there was no money. The miller and his family soon fell into 
hard times. Even basic food for the children became hard to supply.  
"Stop worrying," said the Rebbe. "Know that your cure and your salvation will soon 
happen. You passed your test, Shabbos is appeased, and your landlord will soon ask you 
to come back to the mill." 
The miller went home, fully believing in his Rebbe's blessing. 
Meanwhile, the mill's owner had completed the work remodeling the mill, 
and he had found a manager who was willing to work a seven-day week to take it over. 
But right from the beginning, things didn't work out. Unusual accidents kept occurring, 
and all sorts of problems arose. Huge losses piled up. The situation was bizarre, and 
everyone realized it.  
The nobleman was forced to admit to himself that his problems must be connected 
to his having ruined the livelihood of the Jewish miller. So, he called the man to come 
back to and work the mill. 
"And what about my Shabbos?" the Yid asked. 
30 | P a g e 
"Look," he answered, "after all the unusual problems and sharp monetary losses, I 
realize that your G-d is with you. You may run the mill however you see fit." 
So, the Jew returned to the mill, and was soon blessed with more success than he 
had ever had. He became prosperous. Also, his sleep problem disappeared at the same 
time, just as the Rebbe had said. Now, even with his new wealth, reciting Kiddush on 
Shabbos night remained his greatest pleasure. 
o
“Don’t Forget Who You Are!” 
Young Rose stood on the docks of the Polish harbor, a steamer trunk at her feet. 
Out of her nine siblings, twelve-year-old Rose was the child chosen by her parents to be 
sent to the "golden land," America. Life in Poland was hard, and hunger was a constant 
visitor in her home. After much scraping and pinching, her family had saved enough 
money for a single ticket to the United States. Rose, the youngest of the nine, was the 
lucky one chosen to go. 
With a deep sigh, her father dropped the trunk on the deck and turned to his 
daughter. He gazed deep into his daughter's unclouded eyes. "Rose, mein kind (my child), 
remember: Hashem is watching over you every step of the way. Remember His Torah and 
keep it well. Never forget that more than the Yidden have kept the Shabbos, the Shabbos 
has kept the Yidden. It will be hard in the new land. Don't forget who you are. Keep the 
Shabbos - no matter what sacrifice you must make." 
"Tatte! Tatte!" (Father! Father!) Rose cried as she hugged her father and he hugged 
her, squeezing the breath out of her in a hug meant to last a lifetime. Then he turned and 
walked down the gangplank. As the ship steamed away from the shtetl life of Poland, a 
fresh sea wind blew on the passengers preparing to start their life anew. 
After weeks at sea, the ship finally made its entrance into New York harbor. While 
the other passengers stood against the railing, shouting and clapping as they saw the "new 
land," Rose stood there alone, shy and unsure. Would the new land fulfill its promise of 
hope, freedom, and riches? Would her relatives meet her there - or was she now homeless? 
Rose did not have long to worry. Her relatives were indeed waiting for her and she 
31 | P a g e 
was soon safe in their home. With her mature appearance and demeanor, it was not long 
before Rose found a job as a sewing machine operator. 
Life in America was new and strange. Polish mannerisms were quickly shed, along 
with religion. Modesty, Kashrus, and Torah were slowly abandoned, together with the 
“outmoded” clothing and accent. Rose's relatives insisted religion was "old-fashioned," 
that it was an unnecessary “accessory” in America. Rose, however, never forgot her 
father's parting words. She put on the new clothes her relatives gave her, cut her hair to 
suit the fashion, but never gave up on the Shabbos. 
Every week without fail, Rose devised a new excuse for her boss to explain why she 
did not come to work on Saturday. One week, she had a toothache; another week, her 
stomach bothered her. After three weeks, the foreman grew wise. He called her over. 
"Rose," he said, "I like your work, and I like you. But this ‘Shabbos business’ has got to 
stop. Either you come in this Saturday, or you can look for a new job." 
Upon hearing of this, Rose's relatives were adamant. Work on Shabbos, she must. 
They applied pressure; they begged, and bribed. Rose felt like a leaf caught between heavy 
gusts of wind, pushed and pulled with no weight or life of its own. She was so young and 
vulnerable. She wanted to please her relatives. But her father's words kept echoing in her 
head. What should she do? 
The week passed in a daze for Rose. Her emotions were in turmoil. "On the one 
hand," she thought, "Tatte is not here to help me be strong. I do want to please my new 
friends. I want to fit into this new land,” she reasoned. And then just as quickly came 
another thought: “On the other hand, how can I forget Shabbos? How can I give up the 
beauty Tatte taught me?” 
"Rose, sweetheart, listen to us. It's for your own good." On and on went her 
relatives, until Rose's determination wavered. 
That Friday, Rose walked to work, lunch bag in hand and head stooped in thought. 
She sat at her machine throughout the day. Would it be so awful to do this tomorrow as 
well? Whirr, buzz...whirr, bzzz. The machine kept tune to Rose's troubled thoughts. What 
should she do - or was the question: what could she do? Rose knew there was really no 
question. She was Jewish, and she would keep the Shabbos. 
32 | P a g e 
Shabbos in America was not like the warm day Rose had 
known at home. This week was the worst yet. She didn’t have 
the courage to face her relatives and tell them of her resolve. 
Instead, she left the house that Shabbos morning, pretending to 
be headed for work. She spent the morning walking the streets 
of Manhattan. Together with the city pigeons, she rested in 
Tompkin's Square Park. "Tatte, this song is for you," she 
whispered. The pigeons ruffled their feathers. "Yonah matzah 
bo manoach.” There she sat among the pigeons, singing 
Shabbos songs, with tears in her eyes. Finally, three stars peeked 
out from the black sky, announcing the end of Shabbos. Rose 
had triumphed, but her victory would cost her dearly. She had 
no job and had alienated her family. 
"Baruch HaMavdil..." It was time to face the hardness of the world. Rose trudged 
homeward, dreading the nasty scene when her relatives learned that she hadn't been to 
work. As she neared home, a shout broke into her reverie. "Rose! What ... wait...what ... I 
mean, how are you here? Where were you?" 
Rose looked up at her cousin Joe. 
"Joe, what will become of me? I kept Shabbos and lost my job. Now everyone will 
be angry and disappointed with me, and oh, Joe, what will I do?" The words tumbled out 
together with her tears. 
Joe looked at her strangely. "Rose, didn't you hear?" he asked gently. 
"Hear what?" 
"There was an awful fire in the factory. Only forty people survived. There 
was no way to exit the building." Joe's voice was hushed, and he was crying openly. "Rosie, 
don't you see? Because you kept Shabbos, you are alive. Because of your Shemiras 
Shabbos, you survived." 
Out of 190 workers, Rose Goldstein was among the minority of those who survived 
the infamous Triangle Shirtwaist Factory fire on Saturday, March 25, 1911. Because it had 
been Shabbos, Rose Goldstein was not there. As her father had said, more than the Jews 
keep the Shabbos, the Shabbos keeps the Jews. 
o
33 | P a g e 
Shabbos in Pajamas 
This story takes place during the 1920’s. 
Once a year, Mr. Sam Golding, who was not very religious, would go to Shul to say 
Kaddish for his father’s yahrtzeit. 
That year, on a cold winter morning, Sam came into Shul to join the 7am minyan, 
when he saw two little boys running down the Shul hallway wearing pajamas.  
Curious, Sam followed them down the steps and saw them run into a room in the 
basement. So, Sam walked over and knocked on the door, which was answered by a nice 
lady. He asked the lady why the boys were in the Shul and why they were in their pajamas.  
“We live here,” replied the lady.  
“I didn't know there was an apartment in the Shul basement,” said a surprised Sam. 
“It's not an apartment. We were thrown out of our apartment for not paying the 
rent. My husband refuses to work on Shabbos, so each week he is fired from his job. When 
we ran out of money, we had no place else to go, so the Shul is letting us stay here for 
now.” 
“How sad,” thought Mr. Golding as he went to daven. After davening and saying 
Kaddish for his father, Sam went home to talk to his wife about what he had seen. They 
decided to try and help this family. 
Mr. Golding returned to the basement and knocked on the door. When the mother 
of the house opened the door, he said, “I would like to help you out. Here is a check for 
$5000 to help you find a better place to live.” 
To his surprise, the mother answered, “We appreciate your kind offer, but we will 
not take money from someone who does not keep Shabbos.”  
Sam was shocked! “Don't be silly,” he said, “I am willing to give you all this money - just take it.” But nothing could change their mind. The family was being moser nefesh 
for Shabbos, by losing job after job; they wouldn't think of taking money from Mr. 
Golding, who had his business open on Shabbos. 
Sam returned home, and sat down for breakfast with his wife. He told her 
everything that happened. They were extremely impressed with the mesiras nefesh of the 
family. For a while, they both just sat there and ate quietly. Finally, his wife said, “You 
know, after hearing that someone would be willing to live in a tiny apartment to avoid 
being mechalel Shabbos, maybe we should start keeping Shabbos too?” Mr. Golding look 
34 | P a g e 
at his wife and said “Do you mean it? Because I feel the same way. If someone is willing 
to live like that for the sake of Shabbos, Shabbos must be very, very important.” 
On the Sunday morning after keeping their first Shabbos in 20 years, Mr. and Mrs. 
Golding knocked on the that family’s door. When the husband and wife opened the door, 
they said, “I hope you're not back to try and give us money again. We have not changed 
our minds about taking money that was earned by working on Shabbos.” 
Mr. and Mrs. Golding responded, “Yes, it is true that we have come back once 
again. This time to offer you $10,000! But this time you can accept the money, because it 
is coming from someone who keeps Shabbos. Yesterday was the first Shabbos that we 
kept in a long time.” 
This time, the family took the check and were now able to buy an apartment for 
themselves. They guarded the Shabbos and the Shabbos and helped them. 
o
He Never Sleeps on Shabbos 
Many years ago, a man named Rabbi Zalman Grossman lived in Yerushalayim. He 
loved to do mitzvos, especially to honor the Shabbos. Rabbi Grossman did not go to sleep 
on Shabbos at all. All Friday night, he would stay awake, singing Shabbos songs and 
learning Torah, trying to enjoy Shabbos to its fullest.  
Rabbi Grossman was very poor, and he could not make a living in Yerushalayim, 
so he came to America and opened an office in Manhattan. He worked very hard and sent 
money to his wife and children in Yerushalayim. Rabbi Grossman lived in a small room 
behind his office. He didn’t have much, but he was happy with what he had.  
One Friday night after Shul, Rabbi Grossman came to his room and began to make 
Kiddush. When he lifted the cup of wine, he suddenly felt a sharp pain in his side. It hurt 
so much that he dropped the cup and fell to the floor. Rabbi Grossman cried for help, but 
there was no one around to help him. He was in too much pain to get to a phone to call a 
doctor.  
Rabbi Grossman had a friend named Reb Nachum. He had also come to America 
to earn some money for his family in Yerushalayim. After Reb Nachum finished his 
35 | P a g e 
Shabbos meal, he went for a walk. He walked and walked. He thought about what 
happened to him that week… He thought about his family back in Yerushalayim, whom 
he missed very much… Then Reb Nachum looked around. “Where am I?” he thought. 
He was lost. Lost in a foreign land that was unfamiliar to him. What should he do now? It 
was Shabbos, so he had no phone to use, and it was late at night with no one around to 
ask. 
Reb Nachum saw that he was very close to his friend Rabbi Grossman’s office. 
“Rabbi Grossman never sleeps on Shabbos,” thought Reb Nachum. “Even though it is 
very late, I know he is still awake. I will go to his office and spend the night there.” Reb 
Nachum walked to Reb Zalman’s office and knocked on the door. There was no answer. 
“That’s strange,” he thought. “I know Rabbi Grossman is inside and I am sure he is not 
sleeping.” He knocked again. He knocked louder. He called Rabbi Grossman’s name. Still, 
there was no answer. Now Reb Nachum was worried. He put his ear to the door and 
listened. Was that the sound of someone moaning in pain? Reb Nachum ran to the street 
to try to get help.  
A police car was passing by at that moment! He waved at the police car to stop. He 
told the two policemen that his friend seemed to be very sick. The officers broke the door 
open and sure enough, there was Rabbi Grossman lying on the floor in pain, unable to 
move. The police rushed him to the hospital, where the doctors took care of him at once. 
The doctors told Reb Nachum, “It’s a good thing that you found your friend when you 
did, and not an hour later. You really saved his life!”  
Reb Nachum knew that he had not saved Rabbi Grossman's life. Hashem saved his 
life because he always kept Shabbos. As we sing in the zemiros, “Ki Eshmiras Shabbos, 
Keil Yishmireini– If I keep Shabbos, Hashem will watch over me.” 
Rabbi Zalman Grossman kept Shabbos in a very special way, so Hashem 
watched over him and brought Reb Nachum to save his life. 
o
Reb Mattisyahu and the Wheat 
Reb Yitzchak Mattisyahu was a wheat and grain merchant. His income was 
36 | P a g e 
dependent on buying and selling wheat and other grains. Reb Mattisyahu lived from 
business deal to business deal, and every extra coin he earned went to support his growing 
family.  
One Shabbos afternoon, a group of soldiers stormed into his home. Their 
commanding officer said, “We are in desperate need of wheat to feed the soldiers stationed 
in this area. We are ready to buy all of the wheat you can give us.”  
“It is my day of rest today, my holy Shabbos,” was Reb Mattisyahu’s unruffled reply. 
“It is forbidden for me to trade, buy or sell today. I would love to do business with you, 
but I must decline.” 
“But we need that wheat!” came the angry response, “We need to feed our soldiers. 
We cannot take no for an answer. Fear not, we will pay you handsomely for your grain.” 
“I don't sell today.” Reb Mattisyahu 
stubbornly repeated. Nothing would come 
between him and the heilige Shabbos. Not even 
a windfall of this magnitude. He then took his 
key ring out from his desk and hastily threw it 
in their direction. “Here are the keys to my 
wheat silo. Help yourself to whatever you want. 
I cannot do business today!”  
The soldiers went to the silo, opened it 
with the keys and left some money at the entrance, equivalent to what they figured the 
grain was worth. They took all the wheat they could carry and went off. 
As soon as Shabbos was over, Reb Mattisyahu hurried to his silo to salvage what 
was left, but no one could prepare him for what he found - an empty silo! No wheat 
whatsoever! No grain meant no money. What could he do? How would he feed his family? 
How could he resume his livelihood if there was nothing left to trade? Reb Mattisyahu 
would not let those thoughts bother him. He knew that he had done the right thing. 
Shabbos was Shabbos, and Shabbos was holy. It was more important than anything else. 
Who cares about the lost income when he still had his Shabbos?! 
A moment later, he noticed the pile of gold coins left behind by the soldiers, but it 
did not change the situation. Reb Mattisyahu would not benefit from business dealings 
done on Shabbos. He didn't consider the money his. He discreetly distributed the money 
to the poor of his town. Money earned on Shabbos was not for keeping.  
Reb Mattisyahu’s family lived in poverty for quite some time, but they did so with 
37 | P a g e 
a clear conscience.  
Eventually, Reb Mattisyahu was offered the position of a Dayan, a judge, in the city 
of Pinsk and he accepted it. In Pinsk, Reb Mattisyahu became known as a fair and just 
judge who was sought after for his opinion. After one Din Torah between two very rich 
men, Reb Mattisyahu received a substantial amount of money as payment for his ruling. 
But here again, Reb Mattisyahu knew that the money was not rightfully his. He gave the 
money to the Stoliner Rebbe, Reb Usher ztz”l, to once again distribute to the poor. 
When Reb Mattisyahu approached the Rebbe and told him the two stories, the 
Rebbe was astonished by Reb Mattisyahu’s strength of character and blessed him saying, 
“In the merit of your astounding piety and tzidkus, you will be zoche (merit) to have a son 
who will be a Rebbe’s Rebbe." 
In 5564 (1804), Reb Mattisyahu was blessed with a son who grew up to be a true 
Rebbe’s Rebbe, the Tzaddik HaRav Hakodosh, Reb Avraham of Slonim ztz”l, the author 
of the seforim Yesod  HaAvodah and Be’er Avraham.  
o
Saved By The Queen 
The following story happened over a hundred and fifty years ago, in the year 1831. 
It was the year of the Polish uprising, when Polish patriots organized a rebellion against 
their Russian overlords. They drove the Russians out of Warsaw and proclaimed 
independence (January, 1831). But later that year, the Russians recaptured Warsaw and 
crushed the revolt. In a small Polish town near Kovno, there lived at that time a Jewish 
innkeeper. We will call him Yosef. He was well known in the surrounding countryside as 
an honest and G-d fearing Jew, whose wife would prepare delicious kosher dishes. 
Members of the Polish nobility frequented Yosef’s inn, where there was never a shortage 
of good food and wine.  
One day, on a late Friday afternoon, a Russian General and his troops arrived in 
town. They were returning from the fighting around Warsaw, and settled into the town 
for a rest after a long march. The sun had already set when the General sent his assistant 
to fetch some wine. The General had been told about the good reputation of the local 
38 | P a g e 
Jewish innkeeper, and to him he directed his assistant. From every Jewish house, Shabbos 
candles were shining forth, which cast an air of festivity and holiness in the otherwise dark 
and deserted streets, through which the General’s assistant made his way. He finally found 
the inn, but it was closed. He went around to the private entrance and knocked on the 
door. The innkeeper, dressed in his Shabbos clothes, welcomed the assistant into his 
house.  
“The General sent me to buy some of your best wine,” the assistant said, taking out 
a roll of money.  
“I am sorry indeed,” Yosef replied. “We are now celebrating our Shabbos. I do not 
do business on our holy day of Shabbos.”  
Nothing the assistant said could make the Jew change his mind. The assistant 
returned to his General and told him that the Jew had refused to sell him wine because of 
the Shabbos. The General flew into a rage. He immediately dispatched two soldiers to the 
innkeeper to warn him that if he still refused to sell them wine for the General, he would 
face the most serious consequences. Some time later, the soldiers returned to the thirsty 
General – without wine.  
“Why didn’t you bring me wine?!” the General roared.  
“The Jew said, he could not sell any wine to anybody on his Shabbos. However, he 
sent the key to his wine cellar, and suggested that perhaps the General might wish to help 
himself to any of the wines there, as his guest,” the soldiers reported. The fury of the 
General began to evaporate as he contemplated the strange situation.  
“How strange that Jew is!” the General thought. “He would not sell me a bottle of 
wine because of the Shabbos, yet he is prepared to give away his entire wine cellar. That 
little Jew has a great deal of brazenness, or perhaps courage would be more accurate.” 
Such were the thoughts that crossed the General’s mind at that moment, and he decided 
to meet the Jew in person!  
When the General entered Yosef’s house, he remained standing at the door as he 
absorbed the wonderful scene that met his eyes. The table was covered with a white cloth 
and laden with tasty dishes. The Shabbos candles shone brightly. Yosef and his wife and 
children were dressed in their Shabbos clothes; faces aglow with delight. The General 
almost felt sorry to have disturbed this beautiful atmosphere and to have frightened the 
children. Yosef rose to meet the General and respectfully invited him to join in the feast.  
The General, who had burst into the house with the intention of teaching the Jew 
a lesson, felt his anger melt away. He sounded quite human, even polite, when he asked 
39 | P a g e 
Yosef why he had refused to sell him some wine. “Don’t you know that refusing to sell 
provisions to the army in times of war is tantamount to rebellion?”  
“Your gracious Highness surely knows that we Jews are forbidden to do business 
on our holy Shabbos day,” Yosef replied. “To keep the Shabbos day holy is one of the 
Ten Commandments given to us by Hashem, the Supreme King of Kings. We must obey 
His command over any command by human kings and princes. However, now that your 
Highness has been so gracious as to honor our humble house with your presence, allow 
us the opportunity of fulfilling another great commandment – that of hospitality. We shall 
indeed consider it a privilege if you and your assistant would join us at the table. Please, 
be our guests.”  
The General was greatly impressed. He sat down at the table and motioned for his 
aide to do the same. Never in their lives had they enjoyed such delicious dishes before – 
gefilte fish with horseradish, roast chicken with tzimmess, kugel and kishka, with plenty 
of excellent wine to wash down each course. It was a feast fit for royalty. 
Before leaving, the General took a handful of golden pieces from his pocket and 
offered them to Yosef. Politely but firmly, Yosef refused to accept any money. “Have I 
not told your Highness that we consider it a special mitzvah to offer hospitality? You were 
our guests, not our clients. We are grateful to you for the privilege.” The General warmly 
shook hands with Yosef and departed in a happy mood.  
Several years later, some soldiers suddenly appeared in Yosef’s inn and arrested him. 
Together with other dangerous rebels and criminals, Yosef was brought to Vilna in chains. 
During the long investigation that followed, Yosef learned that he was accused of taking 
part in a new Polish conspiracy to overthrow the Russians and drive them out of Poland. 
It so happened that the leader of the local rebels, Pan Kanarski, was captured, and in his 
documents, Yosef’s inn was mentioned as the place where members of the Polish nobility 
frequently met to plan their revolt. This was proof enough that Yosef, too, was part of the 
conspiracy, even though it was not true.  
Yosef sat in prison awaiting trial, fully aware of the serious sentence that would be 
meted out to him – lifelong deportation to Siberia with hard labor, from which very few 
ever returned alive; or perhaps more mercifully – a quick death by a firing squad. In 
addition to his own plight, Yosef knew that if he were found guilty, it would cast a shadow 
on all the Jews of his town, with endless repression and persecutions. While he knew that 
all efforts would be made by his fellow Jews to establish his innocence, he did not feel 
very confident about the outcome. His only hope was to trust in Hashem. There was 
nothing for Yosef to do but daven with all his heart and recite Tehillim, which he did 
40 | P a g e 
constantly, tearfully, and with a broken heart.  
One day, as he was in the midst of such davening, the heavy door of his solitary jail 
cell opened, and a high official appeared. He was the Chief Inspector of prisons, on a 
routine check-up of the prison cells. The tears which filled Yosef’s eyes blurred his vision, 
and he could not see the Inspector very well. But the Inspector gazed at him intently, and 
then exclaimed, “Why, this is my good friend, Yosef the innkeeper! Good Heavens, what 
are you doing here?” Yosef wiped his tears and looked in astonishment at the Inspector. 
It suddenly dawned on him that this was none other than the General whom he had 
entertained in his house that Friday night many years before!  
“Believe me, your Highness, I have done no wrong. I have always minded my own 
business, and have taken no part in any politics. I am as innocent as a baby,” Yosef cried.  
“I have no doubt about it, Yosef,” the Chief Inspector assured him. “Rest assured 
that I shall leave no stone unturned to get you out of here. At last, I shall be able to repay 
you for the friendship and hospitality you showed me that Friday night. I have never 
forgotten the experience of that evening.”  
That General, now the Chief Inspector, personally appeared before the 
investigating committee and vouched for the innocence of the Jewish innkeeper. He told 
them in detail of his experience with the innkeeper, and assured them that from his 
personal knowledge, he had not the slightest doubt that Yosef had no part in any 
conspiracy.  
“He is nothing more than an innkeeper, whose inn is open to all. In between serving 
his customers, he was always busy with his sacred books. How can he be held responsible 
for the actions of customers who found his inn a very attractive place to have a good 
meal?” The Chief Inspector’s words, and his great influence in the highest spheres of the 
Russian government, dispelled all the suspicion directed against Yosef, and he was 
promptly released and sent home. Great was the joy of Yosef’s family when he suddenly 
returned home, a free man.  
“How did this wonderful thing happen?” his wife asked.  
“The Queen has intervened in my behalf,” said Yosef.  
“Which Queen?” she wondered. 
“The Shabbos Queen, of course,” replied Yosef with a smile. 
o
41 | P a g e 
From Kiddush To Havdalah 
Baron Anshel Rothschild, the leading banker in Europe, was a proud Jew and his 
emunah was legendary. Despite his many business dealings, on Shabbos everything came 
grinding to a halt as if nothing else existed and he was simple Jew attached to his Shabbos. 
One time, a large financial institution in England was on the verge of collapse. It 
needed to be rescued by a person or group with great financial means. The directors 
decided that Baron Rothschild would be the perfect candidate. They drafted a proposal 
offering him the company for 2.5 million Pound-Sterling (the money used in England). 
This price was considerably lower than the true value of the company, but still not a 'steal.'   
The telegram was sent on Friday night, and Baron Rothschild completely ignored 
it. The men of the company were nervous and awaited a reply. When no reply was 
forthcoming, the directors understood this as a lack of interest and the next morning sent 
a new proposal for 2.2 million. Of course, Reb Anshel did not pay attention to this 
telegram either because it was Shabbos. Later in the day, out of desperation, the directors 
sent an offer of 1.7 million. This one arrived on Motzei Shabbos and Reb Anshel opened 
it together with the other two, and sent back a positive response to the third offer. 
As soon as he sent off his reply, he gathered his people together to update them on 
the transaction, and more importantly, to teach them a lesson on the koach of 
Shabbos. Shabbos is not only profitable in the next world, but in this one as well for those 
who watch over it. 
Hashem rewards those who keep Shabbos.  
o
No Weekday Talk  
Many years ago, in Eretz Yisroel, there lived a Jew who owned a vineyard.  His 
vineyard was protected on all sides by fences.  One Shabbos afternoon, when the man was 
taking a little walk, he noticed that the fence was broken in one spot. He became very 
worried.   
42 | P a g e 
“If wild animals get into the vineyard, they will eat up my grapes,” he thought, “I 
will no longer earn money from selling grapes. I will have to fix the fence immediately 
after Shabbos.”   
In order to save time, he decided, “I will 
go on Shabbos to someone who knows about 
fence building to find out exactly how to fix the 
fence. The sooner my fence will be repaired, the 
safer my grapes will be. If I know exactly how 
to do it, I will be able to start as soon as Shabbos 
is over.” 
When he came home after talking to the fence expert, he was calm at first, but soon 
he began feeling sorry for his actions. 
“What have I done?” he exclaimed. “I made a terrible mistake! I’m afraid I was 
mechalel Shabbos. During Shabbos, we are not even allowed to talk about forbidden work 
that we plan to do after Shabbos. Hashem wants us to imagine that all work is done. We 
should not worry about future work at all.” He was so sorry that he had discussed the 
fence repair on Shabbos that he decided, “I must do teshuvah. But how?” 
The man thought, “I want to show Hashem I am really sorry that I talked about the 
repair on Shabbos. Therefore, I won’t fix my fence even after Shabbos is over! I will always 
leave it broken, just as it is now.” 
He was, in fact, allowed to repair the fence after Shabbos, but since he was such a 
tzaddik, he didn’t want to benefit from words that were forbidden on Shabbos. 
Hashem rewarded the man by performing a nes, a miracle, for him. A huge tree 
began to grow on the exact spot where the fence was broken and it completely blocked 
the hole in the fence. This tree was a special type called a Tzlaf Tree. It grows delicious 
edible little fruits similar to dates and the leaves can also be eaten. There are always plenty 
of fruits on the tree because the fruits of the Tzlaf Tree grow and regrow very quickly.  
This amazing tree also provided the righteous man with a good income. He was 
able to sell its fruits, which kept growing all the time. From then on, he could learn Torah 
without worrying about money. This was his reward for treating Shabbos properly and 
doing sincere teshuvah. 
o
43 | P a g e 
Reach for the Gold 
Sam Zeitlin, also known as "Brooklyn Lightning," raised his arms in victory as he 
sped through the finish-line fifty meters ahead of the competition at the 1967 U.S. 
Olympic cycling pre-trials. A wave of happiness washed over him as the crowd lifted his 
exhausted body high in the air. Meanwhile, a grim-faced coach fought his way through the 
mob, and whispered into his trainee's ear. Sam had just been officially disqualified from 
the race because he raised his arms a fraction of a second before crossing the finish-line. 
From the time Sam Zeitlin's father bought him a gleaming red Schwinn 
bicycle on his fifth birthday, Sam dreamed of racing in the Olympics. As an adolescent, 
Sam saved up money and purchased a custom-made track bike. 
Sam wasted no time in entering competitions throughout the New York 
metropolitan area, and won race after race. Scouts soon took notice of Sam's talent and 
perseverance, and he was asked to join the New York Cycling Team. Thereafter, he made 
the American National Cycling Team where he won medals in Israel, across South and 
Central America, the USA and Canada, and Europe. He rode his bike through all weather 
conditions, in an effort to win the Olympic gold medal he dreamed of as a five-year-old. 
A few days after being rejected, Sam went for a bike ride through Long 
Island. As he turned a corner, he heard the frightening screech of a car approaching him. 
Sam's swift reflexes allowed him to swerve onto the sidewalk, thus avoiding the car, 
preventing catastrophic injuries and even death. Stunned, Sam looked over his shoulder, 
and saw his chief cycling rival, Doug, sitting in the driver's seat of a black Corvette. Doug's 
voice rang with venom, "We'll get you next time, Jew!" 
Realizing that he was singled out because of his Jewish religion, Sam decided 
to join the Israeli cycling team. He was determined not to give up on his dream. Sam 
moved to Israel, where his professionalism and upbeat attitude made him a valuable 
member of the Hapoal Tel Aviv Sports Club. He designed a rigorous cycling routine for 
the Israeli athletes, and under his tutelage, his vision of sending an Israeli cycling team to 
the Olympics began to take form. 
When he wasn't training, Sam explored the Israeli cities and countryside. 
Although Sam had basic knowledge of Judaism, he was unaware of the beauty of his 
heritage. Once, while visiting the Western Wall, Sam noticed two teenage boys wearing 
tzitzis and yarmulkas. Sam introduced himself to the boys. After a long discussion, he was 
impressed by their straightforward attitude and ideals. Sam and the boys became good 
44 | P a g e 
friends, and they suggested that he enroll in an English-speaking Yeshiva. 
One day, Sam rode his bike to a Yeshiva in Bnei Brak, parked his bike in front of 
the brick Yeshiva building, and entered. Sam approached a young Rabbi whose gentle face 
was framed by peyos and a thick beard. The Rabbi introduced himself as Rabbi Gershon 
Rabinowitz, and Sam was grateful when the kind man took him under his wing. Sam began 
to warm up to the Yeshiva's atmosphere, and began spending much of his free time there. 
Shabbos became the highlight of his week, as he would join Reb Gershon 
and his family for the Shabbos meals. The Shabbos table set with a sparkling white 
tablecloth, glowing candles, and mouthwatering food filled Sam with warmth and a sense 
of belonging. Reb Gershon discussed words of Torah, and sang zemiros that lifted the 
spirit. Sam especially loved the fast-paced song "Shabbos Hayom L’Hashem - Shabbos is 
the day for Hashem," and it became his mantra. The beat would remain in his mind all 
week long. While Sam practiced racing tactics biking along the coast roads near Caesarea, 
he sang the song to himself, matching its quick tempo to the rhythm of his cycling. 
As Sam's appreciation for Judaism grew, he made changes in his life toward 
becoming a practicing Jew. Sam, by then known by his Jewish name, Shimon, moved from 
the rocky hills of Jerusalem to the even terrain of Bnei Brak. Bnei Brak put Shimon 
adjacent to his beloved Yeshiva, and the town's smooth roads aided his cycling practice. 
As Shimon became more observant, he became increasingly troubled by the 
need to train on Shabbos. Shimon wanted to fully observe the holy Shabbos by abstaining 
from riding his bike, but how could he avoid bike-riding on Saturday when it was 
designated as the official day of cycling practice and trials in Israel? 
Shimon sent a heartfelt petition to the Israeli Sports Federation explaining 
his dilemma. He explained that as an observant Jew, he did not want to desecrate the day 
of Shabbos, and that he was willing to put in extra hours of training every other day of the 
week. The Israeli Sports Federation was unmoved. They sent him a letter stating: "All 
official practices and trials will be held on Saturday, no exceptions." 
Shimon did not give up. Instead, he reminded the Federation that he was the 
only Israeli at world-class cycling standards, and asked again that they make an exception 
for him. The Federation's abrupt reply: "No exceptions will be made." 
Shimon had gone through months of brutal practice in order to compete in the '72 
Olympics in Munich, Germany, and he had already purchased his plane ticket. After 
serious deliberation, Shimon resolved that he would not violate Shabbos, even if it meant 
giving up on his dream of competing in the World Olympics. Israel sent representatives 
45 | P a g e 
in weightlifting, wrestling, fencing, and rifle shooting, but without Shimon, there was no 
Israeli cycling team. 
On the tenth day of the Munich Olympics, the Black September terror group burst 
into the Israeli sleeping quarters and seized eleven athletes. The world watched in horror 
as every one of the hostages was brutally killed. 
The State of Israel entered a state of mourning. In the midst of his grief and anger, 
Shimon trembled when he considered how close he came to certain death. In the days and 
years that followed the massacre, Shimon did not cease to speak of his personal miracle, 
always giving credit to his keeping the holy day of Shabbos. 
o
The Lost Sister  
It was a cool morning in the early spring. Soroh and Ella looked out their window 
at the blue sea. The sun was shining making the water look even more beautiful. “Hurry,” 
called Ella, “or we’ll be late for school.” Soroh and Ella lived in a small town in Holland, 
not far from the sea. A short time later, the two girls were off, and hand in hand they made 
their way toward the little schoolhouse.  
Ella, the elder of the two, was a kind and quiet child with deep blue eyes. But seven 
year old Soroh was quite the opposite. Her merry black eyes twinkled mischievously as 
though she were always contemplating some new prank, or laughing at some mischief she 
had already done. Although the two little girls were so different, they never quarreled. 
Rather, they were greatly attached to each other, and could not bear to be separated. That 
winter, when Soroh had slipped on the ice and injured her foot, Ella did not go to school 
for many days. She sat at her sister’s bedside all the time. When Soroh grew tired of one 
game, Ella would play another, and when Soroh grew tired of playing, Ella would tell her 
stories, or read to her. Although Ella could see the boys and girls frolicking on the ice, and 
could hear their merry shouts, she never left Soroh’s bedside, until Soroh could walk again.  
Finally, Soroh was well enough to return to school. On her first day back, she 
listened intently to the teacher’s lesson. Suddenly, the door was flung open. An excited 
and terrified-looking youth stood in the doorway. In a voice hoarse with terror, he cried, 
46 | P a g e 
“Flee, flee for your lives. The dike has broken! The water is coming up. Run to the plain!” 
A wild panic gripped the children. Everyone stampeded to the door. In the street hundreds 
of people were pushing, running, fleeing for their lives! The mob surged forward at 
breakneck speed, racing with the water. When the plain was sighted, a cry of relief broke 
from the panting people.  
At last they were safe. Everybody was there but little Soroh. She was not able to 
keep up with the mob. Her old wound had reopened and she fell behind. Exhausted, she 
threw herself on the ground, and in a few minutes she was fast asleep. She was blissfully 
unaware that the surging water was coming closer and closer, and in another minute she 
would be devoured by the foaming sea.  
The next morning, Soroh awoke and rubbed her eyes sleepily. “Oh,” she cried 
looking about her. “Where am I?” Soroh lay upon a bed in a little room. “How did I ever 
get here?” she thought to herself. The door opened, and in walked an old woman with 
hard and cruel eyes. “Well, little girl,” she said in a harsh voice, “you have me to thank for 
this. If I hadn’t found you and carried you up the hill to my cottage, you might have 
drowned.” Soroh looked about her in bewilderment. At last she was beginning to 
understand what had occurred. But it was difficult indeed to thank the ferocious-looking 
lady for saving her life. “Five long miles I carried you,” the woman muttered. “You’ll repay 
me for my kindness, though.”  
“But where are my mother and my father?” cried Soroh. “Where is my sister Ella?”  
“Don’t worry about them,” said the old woman. “You’ll be happy enough here 
without them.”  
“But I want to go home,” cried Soroh again. “You have no home any more except 
this home here!” replied the woman. “You have no one left in the world but me. You 
might as well get used to the idea.” The old woman forbade Soroh to mention her parents 
or her sister, and besides, she made Soroh work so hard that she had no time to think of 
them at all. As the days passed, Soroh began to forget her parents, and her home, and her 
dear sister Ella. Saddest of all, Soroh began to forget that she was a Jewish girl. For the 
old woman never lit the Shabbos candles, or made a blessing, or kept Shabbos. So, Soroh, 
too, forgot how to do these things. The old woman’s appearance did not disguise her 
character. She was as mean and cruel as she looked.  
For the three years that she kept Soroh with her, she never had a moment of rest 
from morning till night. With the first light of day, she rose to milk the cows. Then, she 
would lead the cows to pasture and bring them home again. She had to fetch water from 
47 | P a g e 
the well, and keep the house tidy and clean. And not one little speck of dust escaped the 
woman’s eyes. Mercilessly, she worked the little girl until she grew wan and lean. Her 
cheeks lost their rosy look, and her eyes no longer twinkled. Her little hands were rough 
and thin. At night, her little bones ached from the long hours of drudgery and 
backbreaking toil. Never was a little girl as unhappy as Soroh was!  
It was Thursday evening. Soroh was sitting in the kitchen mending some clothes. 
“Soroh,” called the old woman, “come in here.” Obediently, Soroh went into the next 
room and the old woman said to her, “Tomorrow, there will be a fair near the village of 
Yondam. You will take the butter and cheese that you have prepared this afternoon to the 
fair. Be sure that you get a high price, and don’t let anyone fool you. You will start at dawn, 
but you must be back before nightfall, if you don’t want a beating. Now get back to your 
sewing.” As she sewed, Soroh mused about the task that she had to perform the following 
day for the first time. “I hope there will be other people from the neighborhood going to 
the fair. I will surely be afraid to go home all by myself, and Yondam is so far away.”  
The next day, Soroh started for the fair at dawn. She had plodded a good many 
miles along the dirty road before she came to Yondam. But she soon forgot her fatigue. 
She had never seen such a colorful and exciting event. Vendors were calling off their wares, 
farmers and merchants bargaining and talking together. After Soroh had sold the dairy 
products and made some purchases for the old woman, it was nearly dusk, and she started 
reluctantly on her way back. Wearily, she trudged through streets that were deserted, and 
dark.  
Suddenly, through the shutters of a little window she saw the gleam of candles. 
They struck a chord in her memory that had long been forgotten. Somewhere, long ago, 
she had seen these same candles. But when? Where? Soroh could not tear herself away 
from the candles. They held her like a magic spell. She had stopped in front of the little 
house, and was watching the candles flicker and play on the shutters. They stirred a 
wonderful feeling in Soroh’s heart, and suddenly familiar scenes of her childhood came 
back to her. She remembered her mother lighting the candles on Friday night. She 
remembered the Shabbos table, laden with delicious food, everyone sitting about with 
shining eyes, and smiling faces; and she could not resist an impulse to enter the little house 
where the candles shone in the window. “At least, once again, I will see the Shabbos table 
as it was in my own home many years ago,” thought Soroh, and she knocked timidly at 
the door. The next moment, the door opened. “Soroh!” cried Ella. “Is it really you?” she 
cried again, embracing her long-lost sister. “Oh, Ella!” Soroh cried, and fainted. A little 
while later, Soroh was sitting by the table surrounded by her parents and sister. “At last, 
48 | P a g e 
Soroh, you have come home again! We thought you had drowned on that fateful day when 
the dike broke. Where have you been? What brought you back to us?” Soroh told them 
what had happened to her, and with tears of joy gleaming in her eyes, she concluded: “The 
candles, mother! The Shabbos candles, burning in the window, brought me back home!” 
o
The Best Medicine 
Several years ago, Rabbi Kalman Fogel, Principal of the Hebrew Academy of 
Nassau County (HANC) underwent a minor, yet painful, operation. When he was leaving 
the hospital, his doctor prescribed Tylenol with Codeine in order to help manage the pain. 
As you may know, Tylenol does two things: it helps limits pain and it also helps lower a 
fever. Fever can be the body's way of fighting off infection. 
While at home recuperating, Rabbi Fogel took the Tylenol that whole first week. 
By Shabbos, the pain began to recede. Since he was not in much pain by that point, Rabbi 
Fogel knew that Hilchos Shabbos dictate that he should try not to take the pills on 
Shabbos. 
In a strange and scary occurrence, that following Sunday, his fever shot up and 
Rabbi Fogel fainted. His family called the doctor who had operated on him. The surgeon 
told his family to rush Rabbi Fogel straight to the emergency room. 
When he arrived, the doctor did some tests and realized that somehow, a small cut 
had accidentally been made during the operation. That small cut became infected and the 
infection had been spreading into Rabbi Fogel’s bloodstream all week. However, because 
he had been taking the Tylenol, he didn't know, since the medicine had prevented any 
fever. And remember, fever is really Hashem's warning that we may have an infection in 
our bodies. 
The doctor told Rabbi Fogel that he should say Birchas Hagomel in Shul in 
appreciation of how Hashem saved his life. Because of Shabbos, he refrained from taking 
Tylenol for the pain he was in, and as the Tylenol wore off, it stopped ‘hiding’ the fever, 
which was there the whole time, getting worse and worse! By the end of Shabbos when 
the fever spiked, Rabbi Fogel had just enough time to reach the hospital and start serious 
IV antibiotics. If not for Shabbos, it's quite possible that he would not be alive to share 
this amazing story. 
49 | P a g e 
Reb Ariel and the Lion 
Many years ago, a certain Rabbi decided to travel to the Eretz Yisroel. He joined a 
caravan of traders, travelers, and camels, which was leaving for the East and Eretz Yisroel. 
After traveling many days through Morocco in the 
desert, the Rabbi realized that the day was Friday, Erev 
Shabbos, and the sun was descending on the horizon. As 
Shabbos approached, still distant from their next town, the 
man realized that he would have to stop. So he asked the 
non-Jewish caravan leader to stop and rest for Shabbos. 
“I am sorry,” the leader replied, “but I cannot delay 
everyone else for the sake of just one traveler. We must go 
on!” Of course, the Rabbi could not travel on Shabbos, so 
he got down from his camel and took his bag with him and 
announced that he would remain in the desert for the next 
day. 
"What?? Are you insane?" cried his fellow travelers. "The desert is no place for you 
to remain alone. The sun is hot, the wind is harsh, the land is dry, and there are wild 
animals that will tear you apart. Not even a camel would want to stay." The caravan 
members argued with him for an hour, but he would not budge, so regretfully, they 
continued on their way to Tunis, leaving the Rabbi to spend Shabbos alone in the desert. 
As the afternoon drew to a close, the Rabbi took a stick and drew a circle in the 
sand, and there he began to daven Mincha followed by Kabbalas Shabbos and Maariv. 
Then he sat himself down to the Shabbos meal and sang some beautiful zemiros. 
As he was singing, the Rabbi saw a lion coming toward him from a distance. But 
the man was not afraid. He began to say Birkas Hamazon (bentching) and as the lion 
approached the circle drawn around the man, it merely stopped, crouched, and sat down. 
It seemed that this lion did not arrive to eat the man. Rather, he arrived to protect him. 
In the morning, the man awoke, davened Shacharis, and opened a sefer to learn. 
The lion kept watch throughout the day. 
When evening came and the stars twinkled in the sky, the lion got up and stretched. 
Then it came closer to the Rabbi, wagging its tail and motioning for the Rabbi to climb on 
its back. The Rabbi took his bag and climbed up onto the lion’s back, and suddenly the 
animal was off running. All night, the lion hurried over the desert sands, and in the 
50 | P a g e 
morning light, the Rabbi could see his caravan a short distance ahead. 
The other travelers were shocked when they saw the Rabbi riding on the back of a 
lion. They were even more surprised when the lion bent its knees and carefully let the 
Rabbi off its back. Then the lion got up, roared fiercely, shook its mane, and vanished into 
the desert. 
Now the travelers realized that even a lion knew that the Rabbi was a very holy 
man. The leader of the caravan bowed down on his knees before the Rabbi and begged 
for his forgiveness. 
From that day on, the people called the Rabbi Ariel, meaning "the Lion (Ari) of 
Hashem.” 
The Value of Keeping Shabbos 
The Golden Coin 
One Shabbos afternoon in Yerushalayim, young Yitzchak Eisenbach was walking 
and he spotted a very valuable gold coin shining on the ground in the distance. The value 
of the coin was enough to support his entire family for two weeks! But it was Shabbos, 
and young Yitzchak knew that the coin was muktzeh on the Shabbos. 
He decided to put his foot on top of the coin and guard it until Shabbos was over - a good number of hours later - but worth every moment of the wait. 
An Arab boy saw Yitzchak with his foot strangely and obviously strategically placed, 
and decided to investigate further. 
"What's that you're hiding?" the Arab asked. 
"Nothing," Yitzchak replied, as he shifted his body to hide the fact that he was 
guarding a golden treasure. 
It was too late. The Arab boy pushed him, saw the coin, quickly grabbed it 
51 | P a g e 
and ran away. All Yitzchak could do was watch in horror as his attacker disappeared into 
the Arab marketplace. 
Dejected, Yitzchak sulked to the nearby Tzcernobel Bais Medrash and sat in a 
corner. Normally, Yitzchak would help prepare the final Shabbos meal, but today he sat, 
dejected and depressed, until Shabbos was over. The Rebbe asked young Yitzchok why 
he was so sad and upset and Yitzchak told the story. 
The Tzcernobel Rebbe (1840-1936) asked Yitzchak to come visit him after 
Shabbos. When Yitzchok came into his study he saw that the Rebbe held a gold coin, 
exactly the same size as the one Yitzchak had almost secured earlier that day. 
"I am very proud of you," said the Rebbe. You did not desecrate Shabbos even for 
a tremendous monetary gain. In fact," he continued, "I am so proud of you that I am 
willing to give you this same coin." The Rebbe halted. "On one condition. I want you to 
give me the reward for the mitzvah you did." 
The boy looked at the Rebbe in utter disbelief. "You want to trade the coin for the 
mitzvah?" 
The Rebbe nodded, slowly. 
"If that's the case, keep the coin. I'll keep the mitzvah." Yitzchak replied. 
The Rebbe leaned over and kissed the child. He saw that Yitzchak understood the 
greatness of Shabbos. 
o
Yosef the Spy 
It was in the middle of the Second World War, and Yosef was fleeing Europe and 
trying to enter Canada. As he reached the border, the border patrol agent asked him his 
name. 
“Yosef,” he replied. 
The agent looked at his papers and asked, “Are you sure your name is Yosef?” 
“Yes, that is my name,” he answered. 
He took a look at his papers again, and stared him straight in the eye and said, 
52 | P a g e 
“Yosef? Come with me. You’re not going anywhere.” 
“What did I do?” asked Yosef. 
“We know what you’re up to” the guard said to him. “We know why you’re coming 
here. You’re a spy. You’re coming into our country to spy on us. You want to tell our 
enemies all of our secrets. We can’t let you into our country. Do you know where you’re 
going to go? You’re going straight to prison.” And they took him and locked him up in 
prison. 
Yosef sat in his cell, broken and sad. He had done nothing wrong. They made up a 
story about him! He wasn’t a spy! He was sitting there in the tiny cell all by himself, with 
nothing but a small sink and a tiny hard bench to lay down on. So he stayed there all alone. 
Day after day, week after week. 
Soon, however, other Yidden heard about Yosef. They started working right away 
to get him out of jail. 
“We know who Yosef is!” they said. “We know that he’s not a spy. We have to help 
him. We have to get him out of jail.” Jewish activists started calling and contacting 
everyone they could in the Canadian government. It took some time but they were finally 
able to convince the Canadian Government that Yosef was not a spy. So, the government 
sent a soldier to the jail with a special message that Yosef was allowed to leave the jail!  
The soldier headed to the prison on Friday. By the time he arrived at the jail, 
it was already close to Shabbos. Meanwhile, Yosef was sitting in his jail cell, davening to 
Hashem, hoping that He would help him.  
The soldier asked, “Are you Yosef?” 
“Yes,” answered Yosef. 
“I’m here to release you from this prison. 
You just need to sign these forms. When you sign 
these papers, you are free to leave." The soldier 
informed him. 
Yosef replied, “I’m sorry, but I cannot do 
that.” 
“You WHAT?” asked the soldier, 
surprised. “If you don’t sign these papers, you are 
going to stay here in jail.” 
“I’m sorry,” said Yosef. “But the sun has 
53 | P a g e 
set and it is now Shabbos. And on Shabbos, Jews are not allowed to write. I cannot sign 
those papers.” 
The soldier said, “I understand, but I will give you one more chance. Sign the papers 
or you aren’t going anywhere. You are going to stay here.” 
“I’m sorry,” said Yosef. “You’re not going to get me to sign those papers on 
Shabbos. Even if it means staying here.” The soldier left, and Yosef was once again left 
alone in his jail cell. 
It took several more weeks for the people to speak to the government again and to 
plead with them to grant Yosef another pardon. Finally, another soldier was sent to free 
him, this time not on Shabbos.  
Yosef was willing to spend more time in jail, so that he wouldn’t be mechalel 
Shabbos.  
The Aroma of Shabbos 
o
Years ago, the tzaddik, Rav Simcha Wasserman, lived in Los Angeles. A family who 
hadn’t been religious for long, who had become baalei teshuva because of Rav Simcha's 
influence, were planning on making a Bar Mitzvah for their oldest son. They consulted 
with Rav Simcha about every detail of the affair. Since most of their family was not yet 
religious, to prevent chillul Shabbos, they offered to host their extended family and guests 
in a hotel for the entire Shabbos. They also asked the guests who couldn’t stay for the 
whole Shabbos not to drive there on Shabbos.  
A short while before the Bar Mitzvah, Rav Simcha called to wish them mazal tov 
and to tell them that regrettably, he would be unable to attend their simcha. During the 
conversation, Rav Simcha asked the mother if she had made cholent for their guests. She 
replied “No,” her guests were not used to Shabbos, and the family was a bit hesitant to 
serve such ‘simple fare’ to their elegant guests. Rav Simcha asked her to prepare a cholent 
anyway. 
The morning of the Bar Mitzvah, a car stopped by the hotel and the Bar Mitzvah 
boy's father's elderly aunt and uncle got out and entered the hall where the Bar Mitzvah 
54 | P a g e 
lunch was being held.  
As the entire family was sitting around the table enjoying each other's company, the 
waiter entered the dining room and set a huge tureen of piping hot cholent on the table. 
At just that moment, the elderly aunt jumped up, quickly excused herself from the table 
and raced out of the room. Her husband ran after her. 
After Shabbos, the aunt called her nephew and his wife to explain her sudden and 
hasty departure. 
"As you all know," the elderly aunt began, "I remember little of my life before the 
war. I had been taken from my home as a young girl of six one Shabbos morning. I spent 
the war in concentration camps and somehow, I ended up here in America. I remembered 
nothing of my early life in Poland, or of my family traditions. I grew up and lived a non
religious life. Today, in the hotel, the smell of the cholent triggered memories of my 
youth.” 
The family sat in stunned silence, waiting for her to continue. 
"It was the smell of that cholent that did it. When they placed that bowl of hot 
cholent on the table, I felt myself propelled back in time. Suddenly, I remembered myself 
as a young child, sitting at the Shabbos table with my parents, my older sister and my two 
younger brothers. My mother had just placed the tureen of cholent on the table when the 
soldiers entered and took us away. I was the only one to survive.  
Now, all of a sudden, I remember them. I remember my home, my family, my roots. 
Thanks to the smell of that amazing cholent." She looked directly at the mother of the Bar 
Mitzvah boy, "I now have a past."  
The elderly aunt and her husband eventually became Torah observant Jews. 
o
The Chofetz Chaim's “Shabbos” 
About 35 years ago, a certain Rav was visiting Miami, Florida. While he was there, 
he gave a speech about the life of the famed Chofetz Chaim. He described the life of the 
great tzaddik, who lived a humble life as a shopkeeper in the village of Radin, Poland, yet 
was recognized throughout the Jewish world as one of the Gedolei Yisroel, a great Talmid 
55 | P a g e 
Chochom, tzaddik and leader. 
The Rav wanted to tell another story about the Chofetz Chaim, but he hesitated, 
for he only knew part of the story. As he stood there at the front of the Shul, he thought 
for a moment and then decided that he would tell it anyway. He thought to himself that 
even an unfinished story about the Chofetz Chaim would have a meaningful message. 
He began to tell about a teenage boy in the Chofetz Chaim's Yeshiva who was 
found smoking a cigarette on Shabbos! The Hanhalah (faculty) and the other students 
were shocked, and some of the faculty felt that the boy should be sent out of the Yeshiva. 
However, when the Chofetz Chaim heard the story, he asked that the boy be brought to 
his home. 
At this point, the Rav interrupted the story and said, "I don't know what the Chofetz 
Chaim said to the boy. I only know that they were together for only a few minutes, and I 
am told that the boy never desecrated the Shabbos again. I would give anything to know 
what he said to this student. How wonderful it would be if we could relay that message - 
whatever it was - to others, in order to encourage them in their observance of Shabbos." 
The Rav then continued with his speech. 
After his talk, the hall emptied of everyone except for one elderly man, who 
remained in his seat, deep in thought. From a distance, it seemed he was trembling, as if 
he were either crying or suffering from chills. The Rav walked over to the elderly man and 
asked him, "Is anything wrong?" 
The man responded, "Where did you hear that story of the cigarette on Shabbos?" 
He did not look up and was still shaken.  
"I really don't know," answered the Rav. "I heard it a while ago and I don't even 
remember who told it to me."  
The man looked up at the Rav and said softly, "I was that boy!" He then asked the 
Rav if they could go outside, and as the two walked together, he told the Rav the following 
story: 
"This story happened in the 1920's when the Chofetz Chaim was in his 
eighties. I was terrified to have to go into his house and face him. But when I 
did go into his home, I looked around with disbelief at the poverty in which he 
lived. It was unimaginable to me that a man of his stature would be satisfied to 
live in such surroundings. 
"Suddenly, he was in the room where I was waiting. He was remarkably 
short. At that time I was a teenager and he only came up to my shoulders. He 
56 | P a g e 
took my hand and clasped it tenderly in both of his. He brought my hand in his 
own up to his face, and when I looked into his soft face, his eyes were closed 
for a moment. 
"When he opened them, they were filled with tears. He then said to me 
in a hushed voice full of pain and astonishment, ‘Shabbos!' And he started to 
cry. He was still holding both of my hands in his, and while he was crying, he 
repeated with astonishment, ‘Shabbos, the heilige Shabbos!' 
"My heart started pounding and I became more frightened than I had 
ever felt before. Tears streamed down his face; one of them rolled onto my 
hand. I thought it would bore a hole right through my skin. When I think of 
that tear today, I can still feel its heat. I can't describe how awful it felt to know 
that I had made the great tzaddik weep. But in his rebuke - which consisted 
only of those few words - I felt that he was not angry, but rather sad and fearful. 
He seemed frightened at the consequences of my actions." 
The elderly man then caressed the hand that bore the invisible scar of a precious 
tear. It had become his permanent reminder to observe the "Holy Shabbos" for the rest 
of his life. 
o
The Write Thing To Do  
During World War II, Harav Gedaliah Moshe Goldman, the Z'viler Rebbe, was 
sent to a Siberian labor camp. It was a miserable, back-breaking experience, but at least it 
was not a Nazi extermination camp. One Shabbos, the commander of the camp 
summoned both the Rebbe and another Jew, a frail, old man, to his office. "You are both 
free to go. All you have to do is sign these papers and go," he said. 
Rav Gedaliah Moshe reached for the papers, and stopped. ‘How could I write on 
Shabbos?’ he thought, ‘True, it was a release, but can I desecrate the holy Shabbos? After 
all, as bad as it is here, it is not life-threatening. I am young and strong. Even if I would be 
detained here for a few more years, I would probably survive.’ 
"No, I am sorry, sir. While I appreciate your kind gesture, I cannot desecrate my 
57 | P a g e 
Holy Shabbos," the Rebbe replied. 
"Are you insane?" the commander screamed. "I am granting you freedom. How 
can you waste such an opportunity?" 
"I understand and appreciate your kindness, but today is Shabbos. I may not write," 
the Rebbe reiterated. 
"If you do not sign these papers right now, you will stay in this place," the 
commander responded with disgust. He then pushed the papers to the old Jew and said, 
"Okay, now, you sign the release papers." 
"I am afraid that I cannot sign either. The same law applies to me," the old man 
said. 
"You two are both insane!" the commander said in disgust as he retrieved the 
papers. 
"Wait!" said Rav Gedaliah Moshe. "I will sign his papers. Let him go free." 
"I do not understand. You just told me that you cannot write on Shabbos. Yet, you 
are willing to sign his papers. Have you taken total leave of your senses? Why are his papers 
different from yours?" the commander asked in shock. 
"There is a major difference," the Rebbe explained. "I am young and strong. I can 
survive here. He, on the other hand, is old and weak. He will not make it. Therefore, if he 
is not prepared to sign, I will sign for him." 
The commander was so impressed by this act of selflessness that he allowed them 
both to leave, without demanding their signatures at all. 
o
The Cow That Kept Shabbos 
There once lived a very righteous Yid in Eretz Yisroel. Every weekday, he led his 
cow into the field where she plowed the ground for him. When Shabbos arrived, the Yid, 
of course, did not work. He rested as Hashem commanded. His cow also rested every 
Shabbos, because the Torah forbids a person to have their animals work on Shabbos. 
Time passed, and the man became so poor that he was forced to sell his cow in 
order to have money for food. He found a non-Jew who was willing to buy his cow. The 
58 | P a g e 
non-Jew paid for the cow and led her to his barn. Bright and early each morning, the non
Jew took the cow out to the field to plow, from morning till evening. 
That Saturday morning, the non-Jew woke up early as usual. He went to the barn 
and led his cow out to the field, but today the cow was acting strangely. She laid down and 
refused to move. “Perhaps she is a little lazy. I will have to teach her a lesson,” he thought. 
He began to hit the cow with a stick but the cow still refused to budge. What use was there 
for a cow that would not work? He would have to return it to the man who had sold the 
animal to him. 
The non-Jew hurried to the house of the Jew who had sold him the cow. “I have a 
terrible problem with the cow you sold me,” he complained, “all week long, she worked 
just fine, but today she became lazy and all of a sudden she is refusing to move. I hit her, 
but it did not help at all.”  
The Jewish man understood everything. His cow had never worked on Shabbos. 
She was used to resting on the seventh day. “Let's go to your barn,” he told the non-Jew. 
“I will try to take care of your problem.” The two men walk over to the non-Jew's farm. 
There they saw the cow resting on the ground, motionless. The Jewish man bent over the 
cow and began to whisper in her ear, “My dear cow,” he said, “As long as you were mine, 
we both rested on Shabbos, but I unfortunately I became poor and I was forced to sell 
you to this man. He is your new owner. He does not have Shabbos. You are allowed to 
work for him every single day of the week.”  
When the cow heard these words, she immediately stood up on her feet, ready to 
begin work. The non-Jew stared in surprise. “Well, I must say, I've never seen anything 
like this. What magic have you done?” he asked in amazement. “What did you tell her that 
made her willing to work? You must tell me the secret so I'll know what to do if it ever 
happens again.” 
The Jew explained about Shabbos. He explained that Hashem created the world in 
six days and rested on the seventh. He commanded the Jews in the Torah to also rest from 
work every Shabbos. “Is that so?” exclaimed the non-Jew in great wonder. He continued 
to think, “This animal has no understanding, yet it knows the difference between Shabbos 
and a weekday. Shouldn't I, a human being, also serve Hashem and keep His 
commandments?” He decided then and there to become a Jew. So the farmer became a 
Ger and began learning Torah until he became one of the great Chachomim whose 
teachings are mentioned in the Gemara. He was known by the name of Rabbi Yochanan 
Ben Torsa. In the Aramaic language, the name Ben Torsa meant ‘son of the cow’ for it 
was a cow that caused him to become a Jew.  
59 | P a g e 
The Carpet Test 
Many years ago, there was a man who lived in the Netherlands. He owned a very 
successful carpet business in The Hague. Among his many customers was the land’s royal 
family.  
One Friday night, the man and his family were seated around the Shabbos table 
singing zemiros when there was a knock at the door. A messenger from Crown Prince 
Hendrick had come to request that a shipment of expensive carpets be sent to the royal 
palace at once. The Jew replied that he did not conduct business on Shabbos. The 
messenger responded that the carpets were needed for a party which the prince was 
hosting that very night! The Jew countered that while he understood the urgency of the 
matter, his religious beliefs made it impossible for him to honor the prince's request. 
The messenger returned twice more that night. The last time, he came with a written 
request penned by the prince himself. The request ended with a threat the Jew would 
suffer greatly were he to ignore the order. Again, the Jew apologized, but stood firm. He 
knew that the current law would not permit the prince to harm him physically or take any 
legal action against him. At worst, he would lose his best customer and suffer a tremendous 
loss of profit. These consequences he willingly accepted for the sake of Shabbos. 
The man's sons, boys in their teens, asked why he did not permit the (non-Jewish) 
messenger to take the key to the store and help himself to whatever he needed. Surely this 
would involve a smaller loss than that which their father would suffer by refusing the 
prince’s request. Hearing this, the man’s aged father told his grandchildren, “Silence 
children! Instead of offering your suggestions, you should rejoice over this great 
opportunity to make a sacrifice for the sake of Hashem and his Shabbos. Listen to your 
father, and do not worry about the consequences.” 
After Shabbos, the Jew was called to Prince Hendrick’s chambers. Fearing the 
worst, he honored the summons and came before the prince. The prince welcomed him 
warmly and asked that he be seated. The prince said, “This past week, I had an argument 
with a friend. I said that a truly religious Jew places his beliefs in Hashem and His Torah 
above all. My friend, however, insisted that to Jews, money comes before anything. We 
decided to test one Jew and see who was right. You were the one whom we chose. 
Obviously, you passed the test and have proven me right.” 
From then on, the Jew was given special privileges in doing business with the royal 
family. And when a member of the royal family visited Eretz Yisroel, he brought back a 
60 | P a g e 
o
gift for this Jew – a pair of Tefillin! 
Army Walk and Talk 
Rabbi Dr. Phillip Zimmerman was the founder of Freeda vitamins. In 1953, he 
served as chaplain in the US Army and was stationed at Fort Gordon in Georgia.  
One Friday night, a serviceman from New York came in and said, “Chaplain, I need 
help. I have three letters here. The first says that I’m supposed to be transferred to Korea 
on Sunday morning. The second and third letters are from my parents’ cardiologist. My 
parents and I went through the Holocaust and I am their only child. If they find out that 
I was transferred to Korea, they will die from the trauma of it, the cardiologist writes.” He 
showed the chaplain the letters. “Please,” the soldier pleaded, “please try to help me!”  
Rabbi Zimmerman had no idea how he could help the young man; chaplains had 
very little say in such matters. But he did not let that stop him.  
The next morning, which was Shabbos, he walked six miles to the military 
commander on the base.  
“Rabbi Zimmerman, what are you doing here so early?” the commander asked.  
“I need a favor. A serviceman came to me last night and told me he’s supposed to 
be transferred to Korea, but his parents, who are Holocaust survivors, are so frail that they 
will literally die of fright if he is transferred. I have letters from cardiologists attesting to 
this.” Rabbi Zimmerman replied, showing the letters.  
“What are you talking about?” the commander snapped angrily without even 
looking at the letters. “The United States is at war!” Then he grabbed the lapel of the 
chaplain’s jacket. The official jacket of the chaplaincy had the Aseres Hadibros on its lapel. 
“You see these tablets? They’re made of stone. Do you know why they’re made of stone? 
Because stone can’t be broken. Well, my laws are like stone: they can’t be broken. There 
are no exceptions!”  
Rabbi Zimmerman felt terrible. It was obvious that there was nothing he could do, 
so he turned around and left. He hadn’t gone far when, all of a sudden, the military 
commander called out, ”Rabbi Zimmerman, where’s your jeep?”  
61 | P a g e 
“I have no jeep, sir.”  
“What do you mean, you have no jeep? How did you get here?”  
“I walked, sir.”  
“You walked six miles from your camp to here?”  
“I walked, sir.”  
“How are you getting back?”  
“I’m going to walk the six miles again.”  
“Why didn’t you take a jeep or have someone drive you?”  
“Because it’s my Sabbath and I can’t drive a car or be driven in one.”  
“You walked six miles for that serviceman and you’re going to walk another six 
miles for him?”  
“Yes, sir.”  
“Come back to my office,” said the commander. The commander looked over the 
letters, picked up his phone and called his second-in-command, ordering that the 
serviceman be transferred to Governor’s Island in NY, with a direct command and explicit 
instructions to visit his parents every night. 
o
By the Port 
Rav Yaakov Yosef Herman and his wife decided that they would live the rest of 
their lives in Eretz Yisroel. After months of packing, they were ready to set sail to begin 
their voyage. And so, near the end of August 1939, the great tzaddik, Rav Yaakov Yosef 
and his wife parted from their family, loaded their earthly belongings aboard a ship, and 
left America to settle in the holy land. 
The original schedule called for their ship to dock at the port of Haifa on a 
Wednesday. They would spend a few days resting in Haifa after which the Hermans would 
continue their journey to Yerushalayim, where they would live.  
On September 1st, 1939, World War Two began. The captain took a circular route 
to avoid possible sea-mines and torpedoes, and the vessel reached the port of Haifa late 
62 | P a g e 
on Friday afternoon, only a short time before sunset. 
As soon as the boat docked, soldiers ordered all passengers to disembark 
immediately and claim their baggage at once. All the passengers would be responsible to 
retrieve their luggage and to pass through customs before being allowed to enter into 
Palestine. 
It was clear to Rav Yaakov Yosef that if they stuck around to claim their belongings, 
they would not make it anywhere before Shabbos. He grabbed the suitcase that held a 
small Sefer Torah, along with his Tallis and Tefillin. His wife took her hand luggage and 
they asked to speak to the officer in charge. 
With tears streaming down his face, Rav Yaakov Yosef turned to the highest
ranking officer and said, “All of my life I have been extra careful and have never once 
been mechalel Shabbos. Now, when I finally reach the Holy Land I will need to desecrate 
it?”  
To which the officer responded, “War has started. There is nothing to be done.”  
“Just stamp our passports and let us through. We’ll pick up our baggage after 
Shabbos,” begged Rav Herman.   
The officer then explained, “That would be impossible. We are removing all the 
baggage from the ship and leaving it on the pier." 
“I don’t care about the luggage,” replied Rav Herman, “please just stamp our 
passports so we can leave.”  
The officer looked at Rav Herman and asked, “How much baggage do you have?”  
“Sixteen crates in the hold and nine suitcases in our cabin,” came the reply.  
“Do you realize,” the officer added, “that once you leave, your baggage will be on 
the pier with no one responsible for it? By tomorrow night, the sailors and local Arabs will 
make short work of your belongings. You will not find a shred of your belongings left.” 
“I have no choice,” Rav Herman explained. “It’s almost time for Shabbos. We must 
get to the city before sunset. Please, please just clear our passports and let us go.”  
The officer, astounded, called to another officer, “Stamp their passports and let 
them through. This rabbi is willing to lose all his belongings to get into the city in time for 
their Shabbos.”  
As soon as the Herman’s were off the boat, they jumped into a taxi which rushed 
them to their Shabbos destination. They arrived just in time for Mrs. Herman to light 
Shabbos candles. Over that Shabbos, Rav Herman was elated, repeating over and over, 
“The Boss (Hashem) does everything for me. What could I ever do for him? Now at least 
I have the merit to give all for the Boss for his mitzvah of Shabbos and to be Mekadesh 
63 | P a g e 
Hashem!" 
After Rav Herman made Havdalah, his host suggested they go back to the port to 
see if any of their belongings remained. The Hermans had both given up hope on seeing 
any of their belongings ever again, but went along anyway. When they got there, everything 
was pitch black except for a small area at the end of the dock. As they approached the 
area, they heard a man with an English accent call out, “Who goes there?”  
Rav Herman answered, “Some passengers from the boat that docked late yesterday 
afternoon.” The guard approached them and asked, “What is your name?”   
“Jacob Josef Herman.”  
“Well, well, Rabbi, it’s about time you put in your appearance. I was assured that 
you would be here the minute the sun set. You are a few hours late. I have been responsible 
for your baggage for more than twenty-four hours. My commanding officer said he would 
have my head if any of your baggage is missing. Kindly check to see that all is in order and 
sign these papers. Please remove it as quickly as possible…I am totally exhausted.” 
o
The Embarrassed Challah 
Reb Shraga Feivel Mendlowitz, one of the great architects of Torah education in 
America, was once a guest at someone’s home for the Shabbos evening meal. Upon 
arriving home from Shul that night, Reb Shraga Feivel and his host found the table not 
completely set. The woman of the house, after an exhausting day of preparing for Shabbos, 
had fallen asleep without having finished setting up. Upset and embarrassed before his 
honored guest, the husband criticized his wife in front of Reb Shraga Feivel for what he 
thought was his wife’s laziness. 
Later, Reb Shraga Feivel pointed out the following. “Really, the halacha is that we 
should make the brachah on the bread before the wine. However, only with regard to 
Kiddush does the brachah over wine come before bread. On Shabbos, the lechem 
mishnah (two Challah loaves) on the Shabbos table are covered, so that they should not 
be shamed since we are passing over them, as they usually come first." 
Reb Shraga Feivel continued. "The halacha is teaching us an important lesson. We 
cover the Challos, these inanimate objects, in order to be sensitive to their “feelings,” so 
64 | P a g e 
they should not ‘feel’ shamed. Should we not be even more careful about and sensitive to 
the feelings of other people who really do have feelings?"  
And here this man was, shaming his wife for not covering the lechem mishnah! 
Reb Shraga Feivel concluded that we must be careful not to perform a mitzvah out 
of habit, but as a way of fulfilling Hashem’s will. In this way, we will think before we act 
and continuously grow as true servants of Hashem. 
o
The Shalom Bayis Kugel 
A husband and wife came to Rabbi Yisroel of Koznitz (the “Koznitzer Maggid,” 
1737–1814). “It’s my wife,” complained the man, “every week for Shabbos she makes a 
delicious kugel. I love that kugel! All week I work and schlep, just to enjoy that kugel! 
When I just think of that kugel, my mouth starts watering. But what does she do to me? 
She bothers me! After I say Kiddush, do I get the kugel? No-o-o-o. First she serves the 
fish, then the soup, then the chicken, and the potatoes. Then, after a couple of other 
dishes, when I’m full and can’t possibly take one more bite, THEN she brings in the kugel! 
Now shouldn’t I be upset with her? A kugel belongs right after hamotzi!”  
The wife explained that in her parents’ home it was always done this way. The kugel 
is served near the end of the meal. She wouldn’t budge on her position. He insisted it 
should be served right after the Challah. 
So, the Koznitzer Maggid decided that from now on. she should make two kugels. 
One to be eaten right after Kiddush, and one to serve after the fish and the soup and the 
chicken and the potatoes. The couple left, both feeling happy with the Maggid’s verdict. 
From that day on, the Koznitzer Maggid always had two kugels at his Shabbos 
table—one right after Kiddush, and another one after the main course.  
They called it the Shalom Bayis Kugel (“Peace in the home kugel”). 
o
65 | P a g e 
Consideration for the Cook 
A student of Harav Yisroel Salanter, zt”l, once invited his Rebbe to spend Shabbos 
at his home. Unsure about whether he should accept the invitation, Rav Yisroel told him 
that he had the custom never to stay in any home unless he was familiar with the way the 
household was run. 
The talmid was quick to reassure Rav Yisroel that his home was run strictly 
according to halacha. “We buy only glatt-kosher meat from the most reliable butcher in 
town,” he said. “The cook in our home is a religious woman, the widow of a great talmid 
chachom. My wife checks everything in the kitchen herself, too. On Friday night, we have 
a beautiful seudah with lots of zemiros and divrei Torah between courses, and the meal 
ends late at night.”  
Rav Yisroel agreed to accept his talmid’s invitation on one condition: that the 
Friday-night seudah last no more than two hours. The talmid was very surprised by the 
request. He would have thought that his Rebbi would enjoy speaking words of Torah late 
into the night. Still, having no choice, he agreed to Rav Yisroel’s condition.  
At the Friday-night seudah, the courses were served quickly, one after the other, 
with very little singing or divrei Torah between them. Before bentching, Rav Yisroel’s 
student asked his Rebbi to please explain why he had insisted on rushing the meal to such 
a degree. By way of response, Rav Yisroel asked that the cook be brought in.     
“I’d like to ask your forgiveness for tiring you out this evening by rushing through 
the meal,” Rav Yisroel said to her.  
“Oh, there’s definitely no need to apologize!” the woman exclaimed. “In fact, I can’t thank 
you enough. I wish you were here every week! I am always so tired on Friday night after 
working all day to cook everything for Shabbos, but I must wait until the family finishes 
their meal. Now I can go home early and get a good night’s sleep.” 
“There is the answer to your question,” Rav Yisroel replied. 
o
The Black Carriage 
On Simchas Torah in the year 1798, an armed Russian officer arrived in Liozna to 
66 | P a g e 
arrest Rabbi Schneur Zalman of Liadi. Simchas Torah fell on Thursday that year and 
within a short time, the Rebbe was seated in the infamous "Black Carriage” which was 
reserved by the Czarist regime for rebels who were under capital sentence. Covered on all 
sides with heavy black metal panels, and with no windows whatsoever, it was designed to 
cast dread on all those who saw it. Guarded by heavily armed soldiers, the black carriage 
pulled out of Liozna on Thursday night and clanked its fearsome way down the highway 
to the city of Petersburg, deep inside Russia, many hundreds of miles away. 
At half past ten the next morning, some six hours before candle-lighting time, the 
Rebbe asked that they stop where they were until after Shabbos. The officer in charge 
ignored his request. A moment later, the axles of the carriage broke. No sooner had they 
repaired them when one of the horses collapsed and died. Fresh horses were brought, but 
they could not move the carriage from its place. By this time the guards realized that it 
would be impossible to continue on with their journey against the Rebbe's will, so they 
asked their prisoner if they could detour to a nearby village, and spend the next day - 
Shabbos - there. The Rebbe refused, but did agree that the carriage be moved off the 
highway to an adjacent field. 
The spot at which the Rebbe spent that Shabbos is about three miles from the 
village of Seliba-Rudnia, which is near the town of Nevel. An old Chassid who survived 
into the twentieth century, Reb Michael of Nevel, used to relate that he knew Chassidim 
who were able to point out the exact spot at which the Rebbe had spent that lonely 
Shabbos. He himself had gone there to see it with his own eyes. All the way there, he had 
seen old and drooping trees on both sides of the road, but that memorable spot was 
marked by a tall tree with luxuriant foliage. 
o
The Gauntlet 
Rabbi Yaakov Yisroel Kanievsky was known as the Steipler Gaon, because he came 
from the town of Haron Steipel. He grew up to become one of the leaders of Klal Yisroel. 
He also wrote many important seforim. 
The Steipler spent his life studying Torah and doing Mitzvos. He used to study until 
very late at night and then get up very early the next morning. He didn’t even notice his 
67 | P a g e 
lack of sleep because he loved to learn Torah so much. Before he became engaged to the 
sister of the Chazon Ish, he shared a story that occurred to him in the Russian army. 
When the Steipler was a young man, he was forced to become a soldier in the 
Russian army. As a soldier forced into the Czar's army, the Steipler was forced to perform 
back-breaking labor in the frigid cold of the Siberian winter. Regardless of the 
overwhelming toil and below-freezing conditions, he continued the difficult work because 
he knew it was the only way that he could continue to serve Hashem. The problem was 
that army demanded that everyone work seven days a week. This created a problem on 
Shabbos. The Steipler emphatically declared that by no means was he going to work on 
Shabbos. The Russian official did not need more than one insolent Jew who refused his 
orders. The captain in charge flew into a rage, typical of the anti-Semitic brute that he was. 
Suddenly, he stopped screaming, as a diabolical smile crossed his face. 
He would grant the Steipler's request on the condition that the soldier pass a little 
test. If he could prove himself to be a strong warrior, he would be permitted to observe 
Shabbos. The test was "simple." The captain ordered his soldiers to form two rows 
opposite each other, arming themselves with short clubs. The Steipler was to "attempt" to 
make it from one end of the row to the other as the soldiers beat him mercilessly with 
their truncheons. If he survived the ordeal, he would be allowed to observe Shabbos. 
The Steipler understood the gravity of the situation. He put his hands over 
his head as protection, whispered a heartfelt tefillah and started to head through the 
gauntlet. The guards began to beat him with all they had: no mercy; no sensitivity. The 
pain was intolerable, but the reward of keeping Shabbos was the pot of gold at the end of 
the rainbow. Blood streamed forth from his cuts and gashes. Inch by inch, he trudged 
forward, blinded by pain and covered with blood. He reached the end of the line and 
collapsed - with a faint smile on his lips. He had made it! The Shabbos that he cared about 
so much must have surely protected him. The captain reluctantly gave in to the Steipler's 
demand to observe Shabbos. The Steipler lay on the ground, a bloodied. Nobody bothered 
to pick him up, but he did not care. He had triumphed over the cruel officer. He had 
triumphed over the yetzer hara, evil-inclination. He had won in honor of Shabbos Kodesh.  
o
68 | P a g e 
Shabbos on Thursday 
Many years ago, there was a certain Rav in the town of Yanov. He was a fine Talmid 
Chacham and Yirei Shamayim, but he was also extremely stubborn.  
One day, the Rav was travelling to another town for the chassuna of his son. It was 
getting late in the afternoon, so the Rav asked the wagon driver to pull over so he could 
daven mincha. The Rav walked into the forest in order to find a quiet spot where he could 
daven. The other people traveling in the carriage waited respectfully for his return.  
Soon however, the sun set and despite all their searching among the trees there was 
no sign of their rav. The other passengers decided to continue on their way, assuming that 
the rav had joined a different carriage traveling to the chassuna. On their arrival, though, 
they were alarmed: the father of the chosson was not there! Everyone waited several hours 
but in the end, having no choice, they celebrated the chassuna without him. They didn't 
find him on their way home, nor when they arrived back in Yanov.  
Actually, the rav had lost his way in the forest's roundabout tracks. He wandered 
for days and weeks, surviving on whatever fruit and berries he could find. So distressed 
was he that he lost track of time and began keeping Shabbos one day early. Hashem 
protected him from harm, and at last he found his way back to Yanov.  
On Thursday afternoon, when he began to prepare for Shabbos, his family tried to 
explain that his calculations had become confused, but he could not be convinced. He was 
stubborn. He treated Friday as if it were Shabbos, and Shabbos he treated like a regular 
weekday! He even reprimanded his family for their stubbornness. Rabbonim and talmidei 
chachomim from all around tried to convince him that he was wrong, but to no avail.  
When Reb Shmelke of Nikolsburg heard of this, he immediately set out for Yanov, 
arriving on Thursday. The Rav of Yanov invited him for Shabbos, and Reb Shmelke 
agreed to be his guest, instructing all the people of Yanov to prepare for Shabbos. On 
Thursday afternoon, the townsmen obediently dressed in their Shabbos clothes and went 
to shul. Reb Shmelke saw to it that his host served as chazzan for Kabbolas Shabbos, 
while he and all the others quietly davened the weekday Maariv. Then, as if it were 
Shabbos, the rav, his family, and many others, sat down for a seudas Shabbos.  
Reb Shmelke suggested that his host turn this occasion into a seudas Hodayah  -  a 
meal of thanks for his miraculous survival by serving a few extra bottles of wine. Reb 
Shmelke saw to it that his host drank glass after glass of strong wine, until he fell into a 
deep sleep. Reb Shmelke thereupon told the townsmen to leave and to return the following 
night, on Friday night. Reb Shmelke stayed in the house to ensure that his host would not 
69 | P a g e 
be disturbed, and did not even go to shul on Friday night.  
After davening the townsmen came to the Shabbos table, and found the rav still 
sound asleep. They had their actual seudas Shabbos, and at midnight Reb Shmelke woke 
up his host. "Rav of Yanov," he said, "please join us for bensching." The rav washed his 
hands and joined his guests. 
When all the local dignitaries later offered Reb Shmelke their whispered thanks, he 
responded by making them promise never to make the slightest mention of the whole 
episode. And indeed, until the day of this death, the rav never discovered what had 
happened.  
o
Splurging On Shabbos Wine 
The mother of Rebbi Zakkai had a special beautiful head covering which she wore 
Shabbos night.  When she put it on she felt it raised the level of Kedushas Shabbos to new 
heights. 
One Erev Shabbos her son Rebbi Zakkai did not have any money to buy 
wine.  Shabbos was getting closer and Rebbi Zakkai went to Shul without having buying 
wine for Kiddush.  When he returned from Shul he noticed his mother was not wearing 
her beautiful Shabbos head covering that she always wore.  Yet she looked as exquisite as 
ever, beaming with happiness.  He then noticed on the table a bottle of wine.  Not just 
any wine, but a bottle of very expensive wine standing tall on the Shabbos table waiting 
for Kiddush.  
Rebbi Zakkai understood what happened and went over to her and gave her a very 
warm bracha for her devotion and great sacrifice L'Kavod Shabbos.  The next year Rebbi 
Zakkai's fortune took a turn upwards and he became a very wealthy man.  The first thing 
he did was to go out and buy his mother a magnificent head covering shining with precious 
stones. 
When Rebbi Zakkai's mother passed away, she left over for her son, three hundred 
barrels of wine for an inheritance.  When Rebbi Zakkai was niftar he left over three 
thousand barrels of wine.  All this in the zchus of being Michabed Shabbos with the best 
wine.  
70 | P a g e 
The Most Beautiful Sukkah 
Each year, visitors that would come to the Finkelman family’s sukkah were always 
surprised; a most unusual decoration was always hanging across the sukkah. It looked like 
a bunch of crumpled papers tied together with string. On the first night of sukkos Mr. 
Finkelman would tell over the story of this interesting decoration.  
“In the early 1900’s many Yidden needed to be moser nefesh to observe Shabbos. 
Many factory owners would demand that all workers come to work on Saturday. When 
the yiddishe workers would come to work on Monday morning after not showing up on 
Shabbos, the owner would hand him a “pink slip” which meant that he was fired. The loss 
of a job meant that the family would go hungry that week.”  
The crowd would listen with amazement as Mr. Finkelman continued. “This would 
happen to certain families each and every week. The father would come home from shul 
on Shabbos, and with tremendous joy and happiness he would make kiddush and show 
the children how lucky they were to be moser nefesh for Shabbos Kodesh. They would 
rejoice in the fact that they overcame the challenge of not desecrating Shabbos, and they 
would sing zemiros with great joy.” 
“I was zoche to overcome this test and I feel that all of these pink slips that I myself 
received, make the most beautiful decoration for our sukkah.”  
It is no wonder that the Finkelmans have generations that follow their illustrious 
Zaideh as erliche yidden. Doing mitzvos and learning Torah with joy has a very positive 
effect on ourselves and those around us.  
o
Shabbos is Mekor Habrocha 
One day in the early winter of 1931, a young Jewish woman sat with her child in 
the waiting room of a very big doctor’s office in the city of Warsaw. She was finally called 
in and the doctor checked the child who seemed to be very ill. “I am sorry, there is nothing 
I can do for your child” the doctor said to the young mother. “He is very sick.” The 
woman left the office and was crying softly as she made her way back to the inn where 
she was staying.  
71 | P a g e 
“Why are you crying?” asked an elderly woman. The young mother explained that 
her child was ill and the doctor had given up on healing him. “Why don’t you go to the 
Chofetz Chaim, he lives in Radin. If you leave now, you’ll arrive in a few hours.” The 
young mother thanked the elderly lady and listened to her advice.  
She arrived at the Chofetz Chaim’s house and asked to be let in. “I am sorry, but I 
cannot let anyone in” said the grandson softly. “The Rav is old and weak and doesn’t really 
see visitors anymore.” The young woman broke down crying and with a pleading cry she 
said, “Please, my baby is ill and I want a bracha.” The grandson allowed her in and she 
stood before the great tzadik holding her baby in her hands.  
After listening to what the mother said, the Chofetz Chaim responded. “Vein nisht 
mein tuchteral, - don’t cry my daughter - if you agree to always have your Shabbos table set 
early and light your Shabbos neiros early as well, Shabbos, which brings bracha, will most 
definitely heal your child.” The woman thanked the Tzadik and accepted upon herself to 
honor Shabbos by greeting it early and lighting the candles early as well.  
Three months later when she brought the child back to the doctor for another visit, 
the doctor exclaimed: “This cannot be the same child that I saw a few months ago, he is 
a healthy boy, while the other child was ill.” Shabbos which brings bracha had indeed 
brought brocha and a refuah shlaima to that young boy.  
o
Shabbos and a Bowling Alley 
One Friday afternoon Chaim was on the subway, leaving plenty of time to arrive at 
his destination before Shabbos. Suddenly, there was a screech . . . the train came to an 
abrupt halt. The announcer said over the speaker that they were having technical 
difficulties with the train! Chaim looked at his watch, there was still plenty of time to get 
to his destination. Apparently, the technical difficulties were quite complicated, and after 
an hour and- a-half they still had not been solved. At this point Chaim was starting to get 
nervous; the hand of his watch was moving quickly and soon Shabbos would be here.  
Finally, after two hours the train started to move again, with only a short time left 
until Shabbos. Chaim made a quick calculation and realized that he was not going to make 
it to where he was going. With about fifteen minutes until sunset, he ran out of the subway 
72 | P a g e 
station and entered the first building he saw: Tony's Bowling Alley.  
Chaim asked to speak to the owner and was introduced to Tony. Chaim explained 
to him that soon it would be a Jewish holy day and he would be prohibited to carry 
anything. Chaim wanted to know if he could leave his bag with him. Even though he was 
not Jewish, Tony gladly agreed, and Chaim deposited his belongings, including $300 in 
cash, in his office. Meanwhile, Chaim tried to figure out where he was. He found a place 
to daven, and then walked to the home of a friend, who lived about forty blocks 
away.Chaim’s good friend was a little surprised to see him but he and his family made him 
feel welcome in their home.  
After the beautiful Shabbos came to an end, his friend drove him back to the 
bowling alley to retrieve his valuables. Everything was topsy-turvy inside. It seemed like a 
storm had hit and everything was thrown all over. Chaim began to worry that he might 
not get his valuables after all. Finally he found Tony, who had a look of amazement on his 
face. Tony explained to Chaim that there had been a robbery in the bowling alley! He took 
him into his office which had been thoroughly ransacked for any valuables.  
He said, "They took everything, but did not touch your bag. I am sure it is because 
you observed your holy day. The Jews are a holy people; may G-d bless you." He handed 
Chaim his bag with the three hundred dollars sitting safely where he had left it. More than 
we keep Shabbos, Shabbos keeps us.  
o
Shabsai’s Shabbos Gift 
A long time ago, in a village in Poland, there lived a man named Shabsai. When he 
was young, he learned that a person should work hard for his money and not rely on 
tzedakah; he therefore decided to become a book binder. He did not know much Torah, 
but when he sewed his books, he used to say Tehillim with every stitch. When the people 
in the village heard about this, they would all come to Shabsai to bind or buy books 
because they knew he thought about Hashem while he worked. Shabsai sold many books 
and made a good living, but he never kept the money for himself.  
Shabsai brought the money home to his wife and they spent it all on things for 
Shabbos. Every Friday they bought the best food for their Shabbos table, and when 
73 | P a g e 
Shabbos came, they always celebrated it with great joy. Shabbos was so important to 
Shabsai and his wife that nothing was too special to buy in its honor. Once, Shabsai even 
bought his wife a special Shabbos dress with precious gems sewn onto the sleeves.  
The joy of Shabbos helped Shabsai and his wife feel better about the one sad thing 
in their lives: they were getting old and Hashem had not yet given them any children. 
Because they had no children, Shabsai had no one to teach his bookbinding business to. 
As he got older, it was harder for him to sew the books and handle the small needle. His 
hands began to hurt him, and he worked slower and slower. The people of the village 
began to get impatient with Shabsai. They never knew how long it would take Shabsai to 
finish their books. Little by little, they stopped coming to Shabsai’s store. Shabsai and his 
wife soon became very poor, because they had not saved any money.  
One Friday morning, Shabsai and his wife didn’t even have enough money to buy 
candles, challah, and wine for Shabbos! Shabsai’s wife begged him to go to the tzedakah 
fund for help, but he would not do it. “I have lived this long without asking for tzedakah”, 
he said, “and I won’t ask for it now. But don’t worry, Hashem will help us.” And with 
that, Shabsai put on his coat and left his home to go to shul. He did not return until 
evening.  
When Shabsai headed home from shul that Friday evening, he felt proud that he 
had not asked for tzedakah, but sad that he could not give Shabbos its proper honor with 
good food and wine. But as he neared his house, he stopped in amazement – his house 
was not dreary looking as he had expected it to be, instead it glowed with the light of many 
candles. Shabsai walked into the house and saw a beautiful Shabbos table set with challah, 
wine, fish, meat and many other Shabbos treats. He could not believe his eyes.  
“Where did all this come from? Shabsai asked his wife. Shabsai’s wife answered, 
“This food is a gift from Hashem.” “How did you get this present?” asked Shabsai. “Well 
you see”, said his wife, “I didn’t think we would have anything to eat this Shabbos, but I 
still wanted to the house to be sparking clean. Since I had extra time, I cleaned every corner 
of the house. And way in the back of my closet, I found an old Shabbos dress that you 
bought for me many years ago. The dress was torn from many Shabbosos of wear, but the 
gems on the sleeves were worth a lot of money. I brought them to a jeweler and he gave 
me enough money for us to make Shabbos for months and months.” Shabsai was 
overjoyed. “Hashem helped us,” he said. “Now we have all we need,” said his wife. What 
more could we want?”  
“I can think of one thing” said Shabsai. Hashem heard Shabsai’s prayer. And the 
next year, a child was born to Shabsai and his wife, in the merit of how they honored 
74 | P a g e 
Shabbos. This child grew up to be the great gaon and tzaddik, Rabbi Yisrael, the maggid 
of Kozhenitz.  
o
The Blank Check 
David Solomon lived in Manhattan and was a multi-millionaire. He had several 
factories, had substantial holdings on Wall Street and knew exactly how much money 
'talks'. Of course there was no place in his life for Judaism and no time for anything except 
business ... and family. The most precious of all his possessions was his eighteen year old 
daughter. She was the apple of his eye. Her picture was on his desk and the wall of his 
office. He dreamed of the day that she would marry and he would see grandchildren. He 
even had a special money fund set aside to buy her a new house. He hoped that day would 
come soon.  
One day, he was sitting in his office when the phone rang. “Mr. Solomon?" asked 
an official sounding voice on the other end of the line. "Yes." “Have you got a daughter 
by the name of Sarah Solomon?” Again he answered yes. "This is a police officer speaking 
from County hospital. You'd better get down here fast, Mr. Solomon. Your daughter has 
been in a pretty severe automobile accident." Mr. Solomon asked a few questions to make 
sure it wasn't a prank, slammed down the phone, grabbed his keys and raced out of the 
office.  
When he got to the hospital, it seemed like a nightmare. She was in critical condition 
in a coma. Wires and instruments were attached to every part of her body. The doctors 
said that it was impossible to operate until her condition stabilized. He stood there 
weeping. What could he do? His wife arrived and she too burst out in tears.  
The next few days Mr. and Mrs. Solomon went almost without any sleep. They 
waited in the hall for some news from the doctors. Perhaps she opened her eyes? Perhaps 
there would be some improvement? But the only message of hope he received, was his 
father's suggestion that he consult with the Lubavitcher Rebbe. "He's the only one that 
can help" his father said. "I have friends that he did big miracles for. If anyone can help 
you, he can. Just go. Get an appointment and go see him.” Mr. Solomon’s emotions began 
flipping. At first he was excited; there was hope! But then he became upset with himself. 
75 | P a g e 
What? I, David Solomon, a successful American businessman, going to a Rebbi for help?  
But maybe this was something different? After all, this was a well-known and respected 
Great Rabbi. He even heard that he was a great leader, a serious person. He was uncertain.  
Then, suddenly, he was afraid. "I don't do any Mitzvos. How can I go to this Rabbi? 
I'll be so ashamed." But then his confidence returned. He remembered his money. "I'll 
give a big donation and the Rabbi will certainly hear what I have to say." Mr. Solomon 
drove down to the Rebbe's headquarters in Brooklyn to go talk to him.  
"Rebbe!", he began to cry. "My daughter was in a terrible accident. She is in critical 
condition. Rebbe, can you save her? Here, here is a check for fifty thousand dollars for 
your institutions." The Rebbe just looked at him without seeming to notice the check and 
said. "If you want to save your daughter you must begin to observe Shabbos." 
"Rebbe," he replied "I can't promise such a thing. I'm a very busy man and I'm not 
a religious Jew. Here!" he took out his checkbook, put it on the Rebbe's desk and began 
writing. "Here, one hundred thousand dollars! Please Rebbe, please take it, just save my 
daughter." The Rebbe looked at him even more intently and said. "Mr. Solomon, I am 
here to help you. I'm not thinking of myself. If you want her to be healthy, keep the 
Shabbos." 
"Rebbe, here!" said Solomon as he signed his name to another check and placed it 
before the Rebbe. "It's an open check. Write what you want. Take what you need, just 
save her!!" He was really crying now and looked desperately into the Rebbe's eyes for some 
hope.  
"Hashem is responsible for her healing," the Rebbe replied. "You must appeal to 
Him. I can help with prayer, but you must also do your part. Start keeping the Shabbos. 
Then, your daughter will be healthy and you will even see grandchildren from her." 
Mr. Solomon gathered up his checks and said he would think about it. He shook 
the Rebbe's hand and left the study. He waited around for a while outside the door hoping 
that the Rebbe would call him back, but he didn't. And Mr. Solomon returned to the 
hospital empty handed. That night he couldn't sleep. The meeting with the Rebbe made a 
deep impression on him. The Rebbe's face danced before his eyes saying "I am here to 
help you, not to help myself. Just keep Shabbos". It was the first time in Mr. Solomon’s 
life that he met a man that was not interested in his own personal profit.  
Meanwhile, Sarah's condition deteriorated. "Nu," he said to his wife. “This Shabbos 
we won't drive or turn on any lights. We'll be staying in the hospital anyway so we have 
nowhere to go. I think I remember how to make Kiddush; we can at least begin to do 
what the Rabbi said." That Sunday there was some improvement in Sarah’s condition and 
76 | P a g e 
the next Sunday she opened her eyes for the first time in a month. Mr. Solomon became 
Shomer Shabbos and his daughter Sarah not only became completely healed, she 
eventually got married and had several children. Just as the Rebbe said.  
o
Lighting Up 
The year was 1908. There was joy in the Cohen household of Chicago, Illinois as 
they welcomed little Leizer to the family. But what would become of him in America? The 
Cohens were dedicated parents, and they instilled fear of Heaven and love of Torah into   
their dear son. Their upbringing had everlasting effects. In his later years- when he was 
well over eighty years old- R’ Leizer would slip into the Yeshiva classrooms and sit himself 
down among the young boys, just to enjoy the sweet chorus of children learning Torah. 
World War II- March 1944. The winds of war blew across the Atlantic, drawing 
United States forces into battle. R’ Leizer was thirty six years old, married with three 
children. When an official looking letter from the United States Army appeared in the mail 
one day, R’ Leizer did not become alarmed. But he was curious. R’ Leizer opened the 
letter, wondering what the Army could possibly want from him. When he read the 
contents, his face slowly lost its color until it matched the white paper in his hand. It was 
a draft notice! R’ Leizer was over age, but the Army was understaffed. He was to report 
to the downtown Chicago address on Saturday morning. Anyone who failed to respond 
to the summons would be arrested.  
“On Shabbos?” R’ Leizer whispered to himself. “There are no Jews downtown!” 
But there was no getting out of it. And this was just the beginning! How could he keep 
Shabbos – observe all the mitzvos- if he was drafted in to the army? Despite his misgivings, 
R’ Leizer gathered his belongings that Friday afternoon to spend Shabbos in a downtown 
hotel. He brought along Shabbos provisions- candles, wine, challah, a siddur and  
chumash.  
After his lonely Friday night meal, R’ Leizer took out his chumash to review the 
weekly Torah portion, Parashas Vayakhel. He reached the verse “Lo sevaaru aish b’cholmo 
shvosaichem b’yomha Shabbos- do not kindle a fire in all your dwellings on the Shabbos 
day (Shemos 35:3).” For some reason, R’ Leizer’s mind refused to leave that verse. “Do 
77 | P a g e 
not kindle a fire…” he kept repeating to himself. R’ Leizer’s eyes soon closed, but his 
mind still dwelled on the verse even in his dreams. “Do not kindle a fire…” 
R’ Leizer awoke the next morning, his heart heavy with dread. After davening alone 
in his hotel room, he joined thousands of people in the induction center waiting to be 
examined by the Army doctors. It was a long day. R’ Leizer was examined by doctor after 
doctor. For the first time in his life, he wished he wasn’t in the best of health, but he passed 
each examination with flying colors. Late in the afternoon, R’ Leizer was seated opposite 
an obviously Jewish psychiatrist. After some routine questioning, R’ Leizer voiced his 
concerns about joining the Army.  
“Doctor, I’m an Orthodox Jew, and I’m 
very worried about how I’m going to be able to 
observe the Shabbos and all the other 
commandments in the Army. And who’s going 
to take care of my wife and three children?” R’ 
Leizer waited for a response, but the doctor just 
shrugged, unmoved. R’ Leizer watched him 
reach into his pocket to pull out a cigarette. As 
the match flared in the doctor’s hands, the black 
words of the chumash from the night before 
flashed through R’ Leizer’s mind. “Do not 
kindle a fire…”  
“Doctor, you are Jewish. Why are you smoking on Shabbos?” R’ Leizer admonished 
him. The doctor rolled his eyes. “Listen, it’s been a long day – will you give me a break?” 
But R’ Leizer did not relent. He continued to expound on the prohibition of lighting a fire 
on Shabbos, that it was absolutely forbidden, and a Jew should not dare to do such a thing. 
As R’ Leizer ranted on, the doctor furiously scribbled a few notes on the file in front of 
him.  
“Here,” he said, interrupting R’ Leizer mid- sentence. “Take this to the doctor in 
the next room.” Another Jewish doctor. R’ Leizer handed him the file and sat down. The 
doctor looked down at the note, and then peered up at the man seated opposite him. 
“Your name?” he began. R’ Leizer responded dutifully to each question until this doctor 
too took out a cigarette and lit it. The posuk flashed again in R’ Leizer’s mind. “Do not 
kindle a fire…” 
R’ Leizer couldn’t hold himself back. “Doctor, you are Jewish. Why do you smoke 
on Shabbos?” The doctor looked up suddenly from the file and stared at R’ Leizer. 
78 | P a g e 
“What?” he asked incredulously. “Why do you smoke on Shabbos?” R’ Leizer repeated. 
“Don’t you know it’s forbidden?” The doctor shook his head in disbelief. “Oh, boy! 
You’re too nervous for the United States Armed Forces. We don’t need guys like you. Go 
home.” 
Relieved, R’ Leizer left the army induction center. He was so excited that he ran 
over four miles back home, where he told everyone about the miracle he had experienced. 
He went on to raise his family to light up the world with mitzvos and chessed… but never, 
ever to “light up” on Shabbos! 
o
Shabbos, Heilige Shabbos! 
After World War I, the town of Kishinev, the capital of Moldova, became part of 
Romania. It had a vibrant Jewish community in which there were more than 70 Shuls and 
a Yeshiva known as Yeshivas Kishinev. Sadly, during World War II, Kishinev was taken 
over by the Germans, who destroyed the Jewish population. After the war, this region 
changed hands again and became part of the Soviet Union. By the late 1980’s, it once again 
became an independent country - one which allowed Jews to study and practice their 
religion freely. As a result, in 1990, a new Yeshiva was started with the same name as the 
Yeshiva which existed before the war. 
In the Fall of 1992, Rabbi Yonah Lazar left the comfortable surroundings of 
Lakewood, New Jersey, and traveled with his wife and child 10,000 miles away to head 
this small Yeshiva in Kishinev. The new Yeshivas Kishinev had a division for boys and a 
division for girls. Rabbi Lazar and his partner, Rabbi Velvel Tabak, taught the boys, and 
their wives taught the girls. 
One Friday night, as the boys in the Yeshiva were welcoming the arrival of Shabbos, 
Rabbi Lazar and Rabbi Tabak taught them the words of an old Yiddish song which is sung 
to a slow and haunting melody: 
"Volt Ich geven b'koach, volt Ich in di gassen gelofen, Ich volt geshrein hoich, 
Shabbos, heiliger Shabbos - If I would have the strength, I would run out into the streets 
and I would proclaim aloud, Shabbos, Holy Shabbos!" 
To the boys, there was something special about this song. As though charged with 
79 | P a g e 
vibrations from their neshamos, they responded to the words they could hardly pronounce 
and initially didn't understand. They sang the song, first low and slowly and each time they 
repeated it, they sung the words with greater intensity. The boys eventually translated the 
song into Russian. 
There were Friday nights when Rabbi Lazar would watch the boys sway in unison 
with simchah and friendship. The intense emotion gave him the feeling of kedushas 
Shabbos - the holiness of Shabbos - as he had never experienced before. He marveled at 
the way the boys had “adopted” that particular old Yiddish song about the holiness of 
Shabbos. 
In December 1993, Rabbi Lazar and his family left the Yeshiva in Kishinev and 
returned to America. He eventually became the seventh-grade Rebbe in Yeshiva Toras 
Emes in Los Angeles. One Friday night, Rabbi Lazar was reading a book of stories written 
by some students of the original Yeshiva in Kishinev. They had survived the Holocaust, 
and were now living in Israel. In one of the essays, Reb Aharon Wasserman recalls with 
longing the warm Torah atmosphere in pre-war Kishinev. He describes Shabbos in 
Kishinev, as Sadigerer, Boyaner, Tchortkover, and Chernobeler chassidim walked down 
the streets to their respective shtieblach (small Shuls). He writes:   
"More significant than anything else were the boys in Yeshivas Kishinev 
who were so beloved for their sincerity and total dedication to Torah and Yiras 
Shamayim. The baale batim in town would make their way down to the dining 
room of the Yeshiva on Friday night to help serve the meal and make sure that 
each of the students was fed sufficiently. But in reality, we came to hear the 
boys singing their stirring melodies and provide that holy spirit of Shabbos. 
Who can forget the Slonimer chassid, Reb Zechariah the watchmaker, who 
would lead everyone with his rendition of the well-known song of Rabbi Levi 
Yitzchak of Berditchev: ‘If I would have the strength, I would run out in the 
streets and I would proclaim aloud, Shabbos, Holy Shabbos!’ It was then that 
we felt the holiness of Shabbos - a world that was filled with Shabbos. I can 
only say that anyone who did not witness that sight has never tasted the true 
flavor of Shabbos." 
Reading this in Los Angeles, Rabbi Lazar sat stunned! More than 60 years had gone 
by since the days when the song of Rabbi Levi Yitzchak of Berditchev was heard in 
Yeshivas Kishinev. There had been physical and spiritual destruction. And yet, the 
neshamos of the new generation of students were stirred by the very same song. 
80 | P a g e 
The Miracle of the Vinegar 
(This story is based on the Gemara Ta'anis.) 
Early each Friday afternoon, in the house of Rabbi 
Channinah ben Dosa, they would prepare the Shabbos 
lamp. It would be filled with pure oil. Next, thin wicks would 
be placed in the oil, and they would be lit with the brachah, 
"L'hadlik Ner shel Shabbos... Who has commanded us to 
kindle the Shabbos light."   
The Shabbos lights would burn with a clear, pure 
light and would fill the house of Rabbi Channinah with the 
light of Shabbos. One Friday afternoon, just before 
Shabbos, Rabbi Channinah's daughter lit the Shabbos 
candles, made the brachos, and accepted the Shabbos upon 
herself with calm and joy.   
Shortly afterwards, the time to go to Shul arrived, and Rabbi Channinah was getting 
ready to go.  With a shining countenance, he was about to wish everyone a Gut Shabbos 
and walk out, when he saw his daughter sitting with a sad face. Rabbi Channinah asked 
her, “What's wrong, my daughter? Why are you sad? Hasn't Shabbos already arrived? We 
should be happy!"   
His daughter replied sadly, "Oy, Abba, something upsetting has happened. I wanted 
to fill the lamp with oil, but I was in a hurry because Shabbos was nearly here, and instead 
of oil, I took the bottle of vinegar! Instead of adding oil, I added vinegar to the lamp and 
lit the Shabbos candles. Surely in a little while, the lights will go out, since there won't be 
any more oil in the lamp, and we won't have light for Shabbos any longer! So how can I 
not be sad?"   
Her father comforted her and said, "My daughter, what difference does it make to 
you? Hashem is The One who told the oil to burn - let Him tell the vinegar to burn as 
well! Both oil and vinegar, were created by Hakodosh Baruch Hu, and both of them do 
His will."    
Indeed, the lamp burned beautifully all evening and all through the night, and even 
throughout the following day, the Shabbos candles did not go out, because Hashem did 
the will of the tzaddik. After Shabbos, the lights were still burning, and they continued to 
burn until the flame for the Havdalah candle had been taken from them, and only then 
81 | P a g e 
did they go out! 
The same Hashem who tells oil to burn can tell vinegar to burn as well. One must 
know that there is no power but Hashem - ONLY Hashem runs the world!!! 
o
Reconstruction and Deconstruction 
In approximately the year 1800, a fire broke out in the city of Maerkisch-Friedland, 
where the great tzaddik, Rabbi Akiva Eiger, was the Chief Rabbi. A large segment of the 
Jewish section of the city was destroyed as a result of the fire, and many homes had to be 
rebuilt.  
Rabbi Akiva Eiger made an announcement advising all those planning to rebuild 
their homes to write in their contracts with the builders that no work was to be performed 
on Shabbos or Yom Tov. 
Every member of the community followed what the Rav's advice, except for one 
man, who was the President of the community and its wealthiest member. He wanted his 
new house built without delay. To this end, he hired workers to do the work non-stop, 
Shabbos and Yom Tov included! All protests from the Rav and members of the 
community fell upon deaf ears. 
Rabbi Akiva Eiger himself announced publicly that he was certain that whoever had 
his house built on Shabbos would not see it stand for long! Still, the work on the rich 
man's house continued unabated. 
The President's new house was not only the first to be completed, but also the 
largest and most magnificent of the reconstructed buildings. The Jews of the city were 
appalled by this flagrant display of insubordination to their great Rabbi. 
However, the episode did not end there. Not long afterward, one of the beams of 
the President's house suddenly collapsed and crashed to pieces. It was subsequently 
discovered that the entire wooden frame of the house had become infested with timber
decay, and the building would have to be demolished and rebuilt. 
The builders and engineers were at a loss to explain why only that particular house 
became infested, while all the other houses built at the same time from the same timber 
82 | P a g e 
supply remained intact. But to the Jews of Maerkisch-Friedland, there was no doubt as to 
the answer of this puzzling question. 
o
Good To The Last Salty Drop! 
The wife of Rav Yaakov Slonim was accustomed to give out every last morsel of 
Shabbos food on Shabbos so that nothing should go to waste. She said she did this because 
she had received this idea from Rav Shneur Zalman of Liadi, the Ba'al HaTanya, of which 
the following story is told. 
A guest once ate at the home of the Ba'al HaTanya Friday night. When the soup 
was brought to the table, he tasted it and found it excessively salty to the point where he 
could not eat it. 
The Ba'al HaTanya was lost and enraptured in his holy thoughts and was totally 
unaware of what was happening at the table. In a sudden moment of earthliness, the Ba'al 
HaTanya noticed that the guest was not eating his soup. The Ba'al HaTanya asked him 
why he wasn't eating but before he was able to answer, the Ba'al HaTanya threw a hefty 
helping of salt into the man's soup and went back to his otherworldly thoughts. 
This scene repeated itself three times, until after the third time the guest finally told 
the Ba'al HaTanya that his soup was much too salty. Upon hearing that, the Ba'al HaTanya 
took his spoon and ate the guests soup to the last drop. He then said that we cannot find 
criticism in Shabbos food. No Shabbos food can harm a person's health and it is forbidden 
to ever throw out any Shabbos food. 
This is the lesson that Rebbetzin of Slonim learned very well, and carried out 
completely! 
o
83 | P a g e 
The Tchebiner Rov Doesn't Sleep on Shabbos 
For the last twelve years of the life of this elderly tzaddik, the Tchebiner Rov‘s 
health seriously declined, and he was instructed by his doctors to take a rest every 
afternoon. Most days, a bochur was put in charge during this time to ensure the Rov’s rest 
was not disturbed.  
One Shabbos afternoon, the Rov lay down to rest, and for some reason, the bochur 
was not on duty. Within a few minutes, there was a knock at the door. The knocking 
became louder and more urgent. The Rov dragged himself up with difficulty and opened 
the door to find...a nine-year child!  
“Are you the Tchebiner Rov?” the visitor 
asked. 
When he received a positive reply, he 
announced, “My Rebbe in cheder told me that 
if I get the Rov to test me on my learning, and I 
produce a signed note to prove it – I will receive 
a candy! Will the Rov farher me?”  
The Rov warmly invited the child in, sat 
him down, and tested him as requested. He also 
assured him that he was welcome to return after Shabbos for a signed note.         
As he saw the boy out, the Rov gently pointed out to him that in future he should 
take care not to call at people’s homes mid-afternoon on Shabbos, as they may well be 
resting. To this the child replied, “I know that! I would not normally knock on anyone’s 
door at such a time, but I was sure that the Tchebiner Rov would be too engrossed in his 
learning and would surely not be resting!”  
How did the Rov react? He kissed the child and thanked him for the rebuke! From 
that day onwards, the Rov did not rest anymore on Shabbos afternoon, when he realized 
that it was perceived (by a young child) unbecoming of a person of his stature to do so. 
o
84 | P a g e 